Standardized Fabrication Method of Human-Derived Emboli
with Histologic and Mechanical Quantification for Stroke
Research

Yang Liu, PhD,* Adithya S. Reddy,† Joshua Cockrum,† Miranda C. Ajulufoh,‡
Yihao Zheng, PhD,§ Albert J. Shih, PhD,* Aditya S. Pandey, MD,† and
Luis E. Savastano, MD, PhD†

Background: As access to patient emboli is limited, embolus analogs (EAs) have
become critical to the research of large vessel occlusion (LVO) stroke and the development
of thrombectomy technology. To date, techniques for fabricating standardized
human blood-derived EAs are limited in the variety of compositions, and the
mechanical properties relevant to thrombectomy are not quantified. Methods: EAs
were made by mixing human banked red blood cells (RBCs), plasma, and platelet
concentrate in 10 different volumetric percentage combinations to mimic the broad
range of patient emboli causing LVO strokes. The samples underwent histologic
analysis and tensile testing to mimic the pulling action of thrombectomy devices,
and were compared to patient emboli. Results: EAs had histologic compositions of
0-96% RBCs, 0.78%-92% fibrin, and 2.1%-22% platelets, which can be correlated
with the ingredients using a regression model. At fracture, EAs elongated from 81%
to 136%, and the ultimate tensile stress ranged from 16 to 949 kPa. These EAs’ histologic
compositions and tensile properties showed great similarity to those of emboli
retrieved from LVO stroke patients, indicating the validity of such EA fabrication
methods. EAs with lower RBC and higher fibrin contents are more extensible and
can withstand higher tensile stress. Conclusions: EAs fabricated and tested using the
proposed new methods provide a platform for stroke research and pre-clinical
development of thrombectomy devices.
Key Words: Blood clot—RBC—Fibrin—Platelets—Tensile strain—Tensile stress 

Introduction
Rapid and immediate perfusion of ischemic brain tissue
with mechanical thrombectomy devices has become the
cornerstone treatment in large vessel occlusion (LVO)
stroke.1 Although stent retrievers and suction catheters
have proven their value in large clinical trials, they have
several limitations, including low rates of first-pass recanalization2
and low overall rates of complete recanalization.3
The development of new technologies to more rapidly and
completely recanalize LVO in stroke relies on accurate testing
phantoms and embolus analogs (EAs). Unfortunately,
techniques for the fabrication of standardized, humanderived
EAs with characterized histologic and mechanical
properties have not been described in the literature.
To date, the compositional variety of human EAs has
been limited by the use of only human whole blood4-6 or
plasma,7 and no embolus analog was engineered to accurately
mimic the mechanical behavior of the different
emboli causing LVO strokes. In particular, there is a paucity
of models to reproduce the tensile deformation and
fracture patterns of emboli, which are critical phenomena
driving the success or failure of mechanical 
thrombectomy with aspiration catheters and/or stent
retrievers.8,9 For example, an embolus can clog the aspiration
catheter if the embolus is not fragmented by the vacuum
inside the catheter. The stent retriever expands into
and engages with the embolus for pulling. While undergoing
pulling, the embolus is under tension and may
break, leaving residual occlusions. Embolus fragments
may also flow downstream and cause iatrogenic embolization
and further strokes.10 In our knowledge, fabrication
techniques to generate EAs with known and
representative tensile strength that allow accurate analysis
of the complex interaction at the artery/embolus/device
interface have not been described to date.11-14
In this study, the EAs are fabricated by mixing various
volumetric percentages of human RBCs, fresh frozen
plasma, and platelet concentrate obtained from the
hospital blood bank before the expiration for human
transfusion. Then we provide a histologic analysis of
each EA formulation, with the percentage quantification
of RBCs, fibrin and platelets. The mechanical tensile
strength and stiffness of each EA formulation is
then described. Finally, we correlate the histologic
characteristics and mechanical strengths of these EAs
to a cohort of emboli obtained during mechanical
thrombectomy in patients suffering LVO strokes.8
Given the limited access to emboli from patients suffering
LVO strokes, EAs that can appropriately match the
structure, stiffness, and strength of patient emboli are
critical to understand the dynamics of LVO and to
development of next-generation thrombectomy technology.
It is our expectation that this paper, which introduces
a well described and standardized method to
generate highly realistic human EAs at a minimal cost,
will be of value to scientists and physicians trying to
better understand the mechanisms of LVO and recanalization
in stroke.
Materials and methods
Embolus analog fabrication
EAs were molded with different ratios of RBCs,
plasma, and platelet concentrate (4.3 £ 1011 platelet
counts per unit (300 mL)) acquired from University of
Michigan Blood Bank. RBCs, plasma, and platelet concentrate
were measured by volume and then mixed
using a magnetic mixer for 2 min at 300 rpm. The
human blood products were used due to its biological
similarity to patient emboli, consistent preparing and
storing standards across different institutions, and convenience
to acquire. Human blood products have
another advantage over the conventionally used animal
blood which requires animal care and repeated
blood draws with higher cost. Synthetic materials
(such as silly putty or proprietary formulas) are
prevents them from being used for potential fibrinolytic
and anticoagulant drug studies or future devices
that may interrogate the make-up of clots or have specific
engagement techniques with the fibrin network.
Calcium chloride solution (2.3 wt% concentration) was
slowly added to the mixture at a 1:10 ratio to reverse
the citrate phosphate dextrose and induce coagulation.
15-17 The mixture was injected into a dogboneshaped
mold, as shown in Fig 1a. Specimen dimensions
with circular cross-section for a uniform stress
distribution between the two bulged ends were
adopted from the ASTM D638-10 Type IV geometry.18
The mold was 3D-printed with a 25-mm layer height
using a stereolithography printer (Form 2; Formlabs,
Somerville, Massachusetts) with a proprietary resin
material (GREY FLGPGR04, Formlabs). The resin surface
was rough due to the printer resolution limit. A
clear coating (ColorMaster Acrylic Spray Paint; Krylon
Products Group, Cleveland, Ohio) was applied to
the mold to smooth the surface. This clear coating also
made it easier to remove formed EA specimens without
causing damage before testing. The mixture was
allowed to coagulate for 1.5 h before testing at room
temperature.
Fig. 1. Fabrication and characterization of embolus analog (EA) (a) Molding
of a dogbone-shaped EA. (b) Volumetric percentages of the 10 types of
EA: iR, red blood cells; iM, plasma; and iP, platelet concentrate. (c) Tensile
test setup to quantify the EA strength. (d) A sample pulling force measurement
for EA #7. (e and f) Microscopic images of EA #7 with H&E and
CD61 stains, respectively.
Ten types of EA specimens with varied volumetric percentages
of RBCs (iR), plasma (iM), and platelet concentrate
(iP) were fabricated, as shown in Fig.1b. Five EA specimens
were made for each type of EA, resulted in a total of 50
specimen for tensile testing and histologic analysis.
Tensile test setup
The tensile test pulled the EA specimen until it fractured
to quantify the EA tensile properties: (1) stiffness,
the resistance of EA to elongation under pulling, and (2)
strength, the maximum force and maximum elongation
EA can withstand before fracture. As shown in Fig. 1c, the
EA specimen was gripped by two hemostats at the bulged
ends. One hemostat was fixed to a linear stage (Model
200cri; Siskiyou, Grants Pass, Oregon) and pulled at a
slow and constant speed of 0.3 mm/s for the quasi-static
tensile deformation. The other hemostat was fixed to a stationary
force transducer (Gamma; ATI Industrial Automation,
Apex, North Carolina). The tensile force on the
hemostat was measured at a sampling rate of 50 Hz.
Fig. 1d shows a sample tensile force vs. pulling distance
for one EA #7 specimen. Pulling force increased as the linear
stage moved to pull the EA specimen, and the force
abruptly dropped to zero when the specimen fractured.
EA specimens that fractured at the hemostats or slipped
off the hemostats during testing were discarded and not
reported. A video camera (model a6000, Sony, Tokyo,
Japan) recorded digital images of the deformed EA specimen
at 30 frames per second from the top. Two fiducials
(Fig. 1c) were marked on the EA specimen to define the
gage zone where the elongation and thinning of the EA
were recorded during pulling. The positions of these two
fiducials were measured to track the elongation of the EA
specimen between the fiducials during the tensile test. An
open-source image-processing application, Kinovea
(v0.8.15), was used to find the distance L between the two
fiducials to calculate the elongation, or engineering strain
e = (L-L0)/L0, where L0 is the distance between the fiducials
when the pulling force, F, increases from 0 to a small
value (2 mN) at the start of the tensile test. This small
value was selected as this transducer’s resolution is 1 mN
and it has signal noise around 1 mN even when no force
is applied. At fracture, the EA specimen has an ultimate
strain (eut), the maximum elongation the EA can achieve
under pulling.
The tensile force on the EA specimen was normalized
by the cross-sectional area of the specimen to calculate the
stress (s), loading on the EA per unit area caused by force
(such as pulling by an aspiration catheter, a stent retriever,
or, as in this test, a hemostat). Assuming the cross-section
of the EA specimen remains circular during pulling, the
diameter of the specimen, d, was measured using an
edge-detection algorithm implemented in Matlab
(v2017b; MathWorks, Natick, Massachusetts), and
s = 4F/(pd2). At fracture, the EA specimen has an
ultimate stress (sut), the maximum force per unit area the
EA can withstand. To evaluate the stiffness of the EA
specimen, the stiffness E0-0.45 (N/m2) was calculated as:
E0-0.45 = s0.45/0.45, where s0.45 is the tensile stress on the
specimen at a strain of 0.45. Stiffness measures the extent
to which the EA resists elongation in response to the
tensile load (tensile stress). E0-0.45 measures the averaged
stress increasing rate on the EA when it elongates
to 45% more than the original length (e = 0.45). The
strain of 0.45 was selected to compare with that in the
literature.4
Histology assessment
After tensile testing, a sample of EA was cut for histologic
analysis to find the percentages of RBCs, fibrin, and
platelets in the following three steps. First, the EA sample
was stained with H&E to show RBCs in pink12,14,15 and
with CD61 to show platelets in dark brown.12 Second, a
microscope (Axioskop 2 plus; Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany)
was used at 400x and 600x magnifications to scan
the H&E and CD61 stained slides, respectively. The
images were captured by a digital camera (AxioCam
MRc5; Zeiss) at 2584 £ 1936 resolution. Figs.1e and 1f
show the microscopic images for EA #7 with H&E and
CD61 stain, respectively.
Finally, the microscopic images were processed using
ImageJ (v1.52; National Institutes of Health) to apply
color masks to quantify the histologic percentages (area
percentages) of RBCs (hR) and platelets (hP) under the
guide of a senior pathologist. The balance (light pink) was
assumed to be fibrin (hF) and has a histologic percentage
hF = 1 - hR - hP.
Statistical analysis
A multi-variable linear regression model was built to
estimate the volumetric percentages of RBCs, plasma, and
platelet concentrate based on the histologic compositions
of the EAs. This model can be used to fabricate EAs with
desired compositions. The histologic results of all EAs
(n = 50) were used to fit the model, and the goodness of fit
was evaluated by calculating the coefficient of determination
(R2).
The Pearson correlation coefficient was calculated and
used to evaluate how the EA compositions affected tensile
properties (stiffness and ultimate strain and stress). This
statistical analysis was carried out using SPSS v24.0 (IBM,
Armonk, NY). Values of p < 0.05 were considered statistically
significant.
Results
Tensile test and histology results
Ten types of EA specimens with varied volumetric percentages
(iR, iM, and iP) were successfully fabricated. 
Fig. 2. Stress-strain curves (with the average of the curves represented by the dashed lines) and histology (H&E and CD61 stain) of embolus analogs (EAs) #1-
10. For each EA type, the five stress-strain curves represent five tests on five samples with the same ingredients. Scale bar = 0.1 mm.
Fig. 2 shows the tensile stress-strain curves for all 50 EA specimens
and the histology results for each type of EA. For all
EA specimens, stress increases with strain and increases
faster as the strain becomes larger. This means the EA
behaves stiffer as elongated. For every EA specimen, the
fibrin network and platelet aggregates are mostly homogeneously
distributed throughout the EA. In this study,
EAs were composed of 0 to 96% RBCs, 0.78% to 92%
plasma, and 2.1% to 22% platelets, levels similar to those
found in stroke patients.
Fig. 3. Tensile and histology results of the embolus analogs (EAs) compared with 6 patient emboli (P1-P6) from the literature.8 The EA results are averaged
across 5 samples for each EA type. Lower graph is a magnification of the area within the dashed rectangular box in the upper graph. hR, red blood cells; hF, fibrin;
hP, platelets; E0-0.45, stiffness; eut, ultimate tensile strain; sut, ultimate tensile stress.
Fig. 3 shows the aggregate averaged stress-strain curves
for all 10 types of EA compared with the dashed curves
for six patient emboli previously reported by our group,8
which were selected because they have more homogeneous
structure indicated by a single fracture under tension,
like the EAs in this study. The EAs have a large
range of E0-0.45, from 11 to 114 kPa, and a large range of
tensile strengths, 0.78-1.36 for eut and 16-949 kPa for sut
(a variation of 59 times). This is related to the highly variable
EA compositions. EA #9 has the highest hP and the
largest eut. EA #10 has the highest hF and the largest E0-0.45
and sut.
The EAs mimic the tensile properties of patient emboli,
with some variances. For example, patient embolus P4
(black dashed line) has a stress-strain curve that is very
similar to that of EA #6 (yellow solid line). P4 and EA #6
also have very similar histologic compositions, as shown in
Fig. 3. Compared to P4, the eut of EA #6 is about 6% higher,
sut is 20% lower, and E0-0.45 is 50% higher (42 vs. 28 kPa).
Statistical results
The multi-variable models to estimate the volumetric
percentages of RBCs, plasma and platelet concentrate in
order to make EAs with desired histologic compositions
were fitted using the histology results:
iR ¼ 0:367hR - 0:056hF þ 0:124hP ð1Þ
iM ¼ 0:358hR þ 0:833hF þ 0:040hP ð2Þ
iP ¼ 0:276hR þ 0:223hF þ 0:836hP ð3Þ
The model-estimated volumetric percentages have
errors of 6.11%, 6.27%, and 6.62% and R2 values of 0.878,
0.864, and 0.397 for RBCs, plasma, and platelet concentrate,
respectively. The low R2 value for iP might be due to
platelet aggregation in the formed EAs, resulting in an
inaccurate histologic quantification. For all three equations,
the fittings are very statistically significant, with
p < 0.001. This model can be used to make EAs with
desired compositions to mimic different patient emboli.
Table 1. Correlation analysis results of the embolus analog composition and tensile properties (n = 50).
Table 1 shows the correlation results between the tensile
properties (E0-0.45, eut, and sut) and EA composition (hR,
hF, and hP) based on the analysis of 50 EA specimens. The
stiffness (E0-0.45) is strongly and negatively correlated
with RBC histologic percentage (r = -0.609, p < 0.001),
strongly and positively correlated with fibrin histologic
percentage (r = 0.613, p < 0.001), and moderately and positively
correlated with platelet histologic percentage
(r = 0.349, p = 0.013). The ultimate tensile strain (eut) is
moderately and negatively correlated with RBC histologic
percentage (r = -0.536, p < 0.001) and moderately and
positively correlated with fibrin histologic percentage
(r = 0.555, p < 0.001). The ultimate tensile stress (sut) is
strongly and negatively correlated with RBC histologic
percentage (r = -0.696, p < 0.001), strongly and positively
correlated with fibrin histologic percentage (r = 0.702,
p < 0.001), and moderately and positively correlated with
platelet histologic percentage (r = 0.395, p < 0.001).
Discussion
In this study, EAs were successfully fabricated by mixing
various volumetric percentages of human RBCs, fresh
frozen plasma, and platelet concentrate obtained from the
hospital blood bank. Then, the histologic percentages of
RBCs, fibrin and platelets were analyzed, and each EA
formulation underwent mechanical tensile tests to measure
stiffness, strain, and strength. The EAs were found to
accurately represent a broad range of emboli retrieved in
LVO stroke, both histologically and mechanically, and
therefore provide an advanced platform for translational
research in stroke and thrombectomy technologies.
In this study, we elected to mechanically test the EAs
employing a uniaxial tensile test as this is the driving force
applied to the occluding embolus by current thrombectomy
technologies. During LVO revascularization, the
pulling force generated by the aspiration catheter or stent
retriever on the embolus fights against the friction and
adhesion between the embolus and the vessel wall and
the blood flow. If the tension generated overcomes the
impaction forces, and the embolus tolerates the load and
remains cohesive, the embolus is removed by the device.8
However, during tensile loading the embolus elongates,
becomes thinner and may fracture, leading to residual
occlusion or embolization.8 Specifically for the stent
retriever, the additional compressive forces and 3D shear
force between the tines and clot may also contribute to the
emboli fragmentation. A detailed analysis of the embolidevice
interaction is included in the Appendix. Other
groups have characterized the mechanical properties of
emboli with shear wave elastography, which measures
the small motion response of an embolus under propagating
shear waves induced by ultrasound and can be used
in vivo.19-23 However, like other testing methods such as
rheometer or compression test, shear wave elastography
measures only the elastic modulus or viscoelasticity,
which determines how the embolus will deform under
force but not how it will fracture.
To fill this gap, we performed tensile tests to pull the
EAs until fracture and quantify both the stiffness and tensile
strength (the maximum elongation and force load the
embolus can withstand before fracturing). The fabrication
technique here described appropriately represent a large
range (88% or 14/16) of retrieved emboli causing LVO
strokes in stiffness and tensile strength.8 We found that
the tensile properties (stiffness and tensile strength) of
EAs are correlated to the EAs’ compositions and mainly
depend on the histologic percentage of fibrin content
(with the highest r values). EAs with higher fibrin content
are stiffer and have larger elongation and higher ultimate
tensile stress. Such correlations can be explained by the
mechanical properties of individual fibers within the EA’s
fibrin network.
EAs with higher fibrin histologic percentage are stiffer
(with higher E0-0.45). The elastic modulus of fibrin fiber is
about 14.5 MPa,24 much higher than that of EAs, so it is
reasonable to attribute the stiffness of the EAs to the fibrin
fibers. Also, EAs exhibit greater stiffness as strain
increases, showing a strong strain-hardening property,
and such a phenomenon was also reported in tensile testing
of EAs in the literature.5,25 This can be explained by
the strain-hardening property of individual fibrin fibers.26
EAs with higher fibrin content can elongate more (with
higher eut). Fibrin fibers are very stretchable and can elongate
to about three times the original length.26 Combining
this large elongation capacity with the high stiffness of
fibrin fibers, EAs with higher fibrin histologic percentage
therefore can withstand higher tensile stress (with higher
sut) before fracture.
In this study, sut ranged from 16 to 949 kPa, compared
to only 6 kPa for EAs made from porcine whole blood5
and 30 kPa for EAs made from bovine whole blood.25 The
porcine- and bovine-derived EAs are significantly weaker
than patient emboli (sut ranging from 63 to 2396 kPa8)
and are likely fail to represent the stiff fibrotic emboli
when used to test thrombectomy devices or to appropriately
reproduce the hemodynamic conditions in an LVO.
On one side, weaker analogs may not remain wedged in
arterial bifurcations and withstand pulsatile physiological
flow in cerebrovascular phantoms. Although this could
be compensated by diminishing (or completely stopping)
the flow, the occurrence of distal embolization would be
underestimated. In addition, structurally weaker EA
would be more likely to be “ingested” by suction catheters
overestimating the rates of first-pass complete recanalization
in the bench for a certaininner diameter and vacuum
level, while in real clinical situation stronger clots would
“cork” the catheters. On the other side, stents developed
to incorporate these softer analogs could lack sufficient
radial force to expand through emboli in LVO stroke leading
to “clot rolling” and failed recanalization. Using the
fabrication method described in this study, we made EAs
that is strong enough to form stable LVO under physiological
flow conditions and therefore provide a true estimation
of the iatrogenic embolization. In addition, other
studies using these EAs have shown to appropriately
demonstrated the EA-device interaction and the device
failure mechanism inside cerebrovascular phantoms.8,9
Although the EAs presented here have stiffnesses and
strengths similar to patient emboli and they constitute a
significant step forward in LVO modelling, there are
some differences to consider. First, whereas patient
emboli can be quite inhomogeneous, these EAs (Fig. 2)
were homogeneous in nature and did not contain some
components related to thromboemboli that derive from
ruptured atherosclerotic plaque, such as calcifications and
necrotic core material. The pulling of an inhomogeneous
patient embolus causes the weaker and less stiff parts of
the embolus to peel off first and detach from the main
embolus block, leaving the stronger and stiffer part
behind to elongate. This embolus fragment can withstand
larger elongation, as supported by the much
larger eut (up to 4.89) associated with multi-focal fracture
compared to that of single focal fracture.8 The heterogeneity
and topographic pattern (distribution of
stronger and weaker parts) of emboli could change the
way how emboli fragment during emboli-device interaction.
The fragment of emboli could lead to residue
emboli and/or distal embolization, as demonstrated in
the Fig. A1. Therefore, future studies should quantify
the heterogeneity and topographic pattern of patient
emboli to guide the fabrication of EAs. Second, the EAs
in this study did not age before testing, whereas patient
emboli causing strokes may be hours, days, weeks or
even months old before the onset of embolization and
symptoms, with the constant “feeding” of blood components
from the blood flow and potential hemolysis.
Embolus aging is a dynamic biochemical process with
observed effect on EA elasticity. The mechanical load
on the embolus due to the physiologically pulsatile flow
within the human body can also change the fibrin network
density. In this paper, to standardize and simplify
fabrication techniques while maintaining representative
histologic and mechanical properties, we proposed an
EA fabrication method in a static condition with short
and fixed coagulation time (1.5 h). Third, the EAs did
not include white blood cells, which were removed in
the banked human blood materials, and were manufactured
using un-expired blood product, which may limit
the availability of banked human blood. In this regard,
although we have not conducted mechanical testing of
emboli derived from expired human blood product, in
bench top simulation with thrombectomy devices we
have not observed major differences in the mechanical
behavior of emboli produced with products with less
than 10 days from expiration. Fourth, ex-vivo-induced
coagulation by calcium chloride could differ from the
dynamic in-vivo coagulation process and modification
of fibrin network.27 Finally, the present manuscript did
not examine the effects of coagulation time, calcium
chloride concentration, and fibrin cross-linking on EA
mechanical properties. The mechanisms determining
EA microstructure response to different coagulation
parameters and the structural differences compared to
patient emboli are relevant topics for future studies.
Possible correlations between the mechanical properties
and/or histology of emboli and clinical data such as
stroke characteristics, treatment strategy (e.g., thrombolytic
medications), and patient outcome should also be
explored.
In conclusion, this study provides a method of fabricating
EAs with varying compositions and tensile properties
to represent a broad range of emboli extracted from stroke
patients. The volumetric percentages of the ingredients can
be estimated by a multi-linear regression model to fabricate
EAs with desired histologic compositions to mimic patient
emboli. The tensile properties (stiffness, ultimate tensile
strain, and ultimate tensile stress) were characterized by
uniaxial tensile testing and found to be significantly correlated
to the embolus composition, and accurately represent
emboli causing LVO stroke. The EAs generated and characterized
in this study can serve as valuable tools in facilitating
the construction of accurate test beds for stroke
research and the preclinical development of next-generation
mechanical thrombectomy devices.
Declarations of Competing Interest
LES is a founder of Endovascular Engineering Inc., Ann
Arbor, Michigan. YL serves on the Scientific Advisory
Board of this company. This company is indirectly related
to this manuscript as it's developing medical devices for
thrombectomy.
Acknowledgments
This study is supported by the U-M Coulter Translational
Research Partnership Program and the NIH Centers for
Accelerated Innovations of the NHLBI. We acknowledge the
University of Michigan Blood Bank for the support of the
blood materials used in this study.
Grant support
U-M Coulter Translational Research Partnership Program
and the NIH Centers for Accelerated Innovations of the
NHLBI
Appendix
Removal of emboli in LVO stroke is a process involving
the force interactions between the emboli, thrombectomy
device, vessel wall, and the blood flow. Both the aspiration
catheter and stent retriever apply tensional force to
dislodge and remove the emboli en bloc.
For the case of aspiration catheter, the catheter engages
the emboli with vacuum suction (Fig. A1(a)). The embolus
is elongated and ideally progressively ingested by the suction
catheter, or “corks” at the catheter tip clogging the
catheter. At this point, the catheter is pulled to apply further
tensional forces to dislodge the emboli from the vessel
wall (Fig. A1(b)). If the tensional force is bigger than
the static friction and adhesion and the emboli is strong
enough to withstand the tensional force, the emboli is dislodged
and starts to move with the catheter. During this
process, the intravascular portion of emboli are elongated,
became thinner and weaker, and could fracture, leaving
residual emboli behind. The fractured emboli substance is
pushed by the partially resorted blood flow to the same or
other branch vessels and cause distal embolization.
A similar mechanism is identified for the stent retriever.
The stent retriever engages emboli with compression and
shear between the emboli and tines (Fig. A1(c)) and then
applies tensional force to dislodge the emboli (Fig. A1(d)).
During the pulling process, the emboli are elongated,
became thinner and weaker, and could fracture, causing
distal embolization and residual emboli.
Fig. A1. Force analysis of device-emboli interaction during thrombectomy with the aspiration catheter and stent retriever. (a) The aspiration catheter engages
emboli with vacuum. (b) After engagement, the catheter is pulled to apply tensional force on the emboli to overcome the static friction and adhesion force between
the emboli and vessel wall. During this process, the emboli is elongated and fractured (black arrow), leading to distal embolization under the hemodynamic stress
and residual emboli. (c) The stent retriever engages emboli with compression and shear between the emboli and tines. (d) After engagement, the stent retriever is
pulled to apply tensional force on the emboli to overcome the static friction and adhesion force between the emboli and vessel wall. During this process, the emboli
is elongated and fractured (black arrows), leading to distal embolization under the hemodynamic stress and residual emboli.