Gold nanoparticles for cancer detection and treatment: The role of adhesion
Y. Oni,1,2 K. Hao,3 S. Dozie-Nwachukwu,4,5 J. D. Obayemi,4 O. S. Odusanya,4,5
N. Anuku,2,6 and W. O. Soboyejo1,2,4
1Princeton Institute for Science and Technology of Materials (PRISM), Princeton University,
70 Prospect Street, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA
2Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544,
USA
3Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02139, USA
4African University of Science and Technology (AUST), Kilometer 10, Airport Road, Abuja,
Federal Capital Territory, Nigeria
5Sheda Science and Technology Complex (SHESTCO), Gwagwalada, Abuja, Federal Capital Territory,
Nigeria
6Department of Chemistry and Chemical Technology, Bronx Community College, New York, New York 10453, USA
(Received 8 September 2013; accepted 1 January 2014; published online 26 February 2014)
This paper presents the results of an experimental study of the effects of adhesion between gold
nanoparticles and surfaces that are relevant to the potential applications in cancer detection and
treatment. Adhesion is measured using a dip coating/atomic force microscopy (DC/AFM)
technique. The adhesion forces are obtained for dip-coated gold nanoparticles that interact
with peptide or antibody-based molecular recognition units (MRUs) that attach specifically
to breast cancer cells. They include MRUs that attach specifically to receptors on breast
cancer cells. Adhesion forces between anti-cancer drugs such as paclitaxel, and the constituents of
MRU-conjugated Au nanoparticle clusters, are measured using force microscopy techniques. The
implications of the results are then discussed for the design of robust gold nanoparticle clusters and
for potential applications in localized drug delivery and hyperthermia. VC 2014 AIP Publishing LLC.
I. INTRODUCTION
Cancer is currently the second leading cause of death in
the world.1 In most cases, the major challenge is the detection
of cancer before metastasis.1,2 Hence, the diagnosis is
often too late to administer the current treatments that are
available.3,4 Consequently, more than 550 000 Americans
and more than 7.5 x 106 worldwide die of cancer each year.5
Furthermore, for the patients that undergo bulk systemic cancer
treatment, the treatment is often painful, with significant
short and long term side effects arising from common treatment
methods that include: chemotherapy, radiotherapy,
hyperthermia, and surgery.3,4
In an effort to reduce the potential side effects of bulk
systemic cancer treatment, our previous work6 explored the
potential of an implantable anti-cancer treatment device that
can locally deliver drugs and heat to the site of a tumor.
Such a device can be used, following surgery to remove cancer
tissue, to treat cancer by the localized chemotherapy and
hyperthermia. The combination of heat and drug was
selected because of the potential of engineering synergy
through the combined use of localized chemotherapy and
hyperthermia.7
However, the above device requires surgery for its insertion
into the body. Furthermore, it may not treat metastatic
cells that have escaped into the blood stream and other
organs. There is, therefore, a need for novel approaches for
the detection and treatment of cancer cells before and after
metastases.1 This has stimulated our recent efforts to use
nanoparticles to facilitate the early detection and treatment
of cancer.8–11 The nanoparticles can be injected into the
blood stream, where they can also diffuse through the capillaries
and pores, until they reach receptors on cancer cells
that can bind specifically to MRUs (such as antibodies and
peptides) that are attached to them.8
Upon attachment, the nanoparticles can be used to
facilitate the imaging8–11 and treatment8–11 of cancer. For
example, magnetic nanoparticles may be used to facilitate
the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of cancer cells/
tissue, while gold nanoparticles may be used to enhance
laser therapy through interactions that occur between gold
nanoparticles and laser beams.8 Similarly, anti-cancer drugs
that are tethered to gold nanoparticles may be used to treat
targeted cancer cells/tissue and metastatic cancer cells in
the blood stream.8,11 Designer nanoparticles, therefore,
have the potential for localized detection and treatment of
cancer.
Gold nanoparticles are particularly attractive in cancer
treatment because of their strong absorption of light in the
visible and near-infra red (NIR) electromagnetic regions.
This optical absorption is strongly dependent on the shape
and size of the gold nanoparticle.8 Furthermore, it has been
shown that the cell uptake of spherical gold nanoparticles is
dependent on their size, with 50 nm being the optimal diameter.
12 Also, because smaller nanoparticles are expected to
have a better chance of passing through tumor vasculature,
they can attach to tumor tissue and then pass through the
body prior to egestion and excretion. This prevents their long
term accumulation in the body, while providing the basis for
cancer detection and treatment during their attachment to
specific cancer cells.
Since the interactions between nanoparticles and cancer
cells can provide a basis for cancer detection and treatment,
significant efforts have been made to design gold nanoclusters
that can improve our ability to detect and treat
cancer.8,11,13–21 In general, such nanoclusters consist of:
• an imaging core, such as gold that can undergo plasmon
resonance under illumination with a laser;
• encapsulated anti-cancer drugs, such as paclitaxel;
• molecular recognition units, such as antibodies and peptides
that bind specifically to receptors on cancer cells,
ligand chemistry, and protective coatings that limit the
interaction of the nanoparticles with surrounding tissue
and blood during transport to target organs (Figure 1).
During transport in the body, the nanoclusters are subjected
to hydrodynamic and shear forces that can cause them
to fragment into smaller pieces. They must, therefore, be
bound by significant adhesive and cohesive forces that cannot
be overcome by the forces encountered during nanoparticle
transport in the body. There is, therefore, a need to
quantify the adhesion forces between the constituents of
nanoclusters that are relevant to cancer detection and treatment.
This can be done using Force Microscopy during
Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM).22–24 This is a technique
that can be used to study bi-material pairs25 that simulate
pair-wise interactions between interacting nanoparticles.26 It
is the basis for force spectroscopy and the measurement of
nano/molecular scale adhesion.27,28
This paper presents the results of an experimental study
of the adhesion between the constituents of gold nanoclusters
that are relevant to cancer detection and treatment. In the
case of cancer detection, the adhesive interactions between
gold nanoparticles and molecular recognition units (such as
luteinizing hormone releasing hormone and a breast specific
antibody) are measured using force microscopy. The adhesion
between gold nanoparticles and paclitaxel (a anti-cancer
drug) is also measured along with the effects of thiols that
are often used to improve the adhesion between gold and a
number of organic materials.29 The implications of the
results are then discussed for the development of gold
nanoclusters for future applications in cancer detection and
treatment.
II. THEORY
The force microscopy method involves bringing AFM tips
close enough for adhesive interactions to occur (Figure 2(a)).
This ultimately causes them to jump into contact (Figure 2(b)).
The tips then undergo elasticity as they are displaced further in
the same direction (Figure 2(c)). Upon their retraction, the displacements
are reversed, as the loads are reduced to zero
(Figure 2(d)). However, the tips do not detach at zero load, due
to the effects of adhesion. Consequently, the retraction has to
be continued until the adhesive interactions are overcome by
the applied forces. This results in the pull-off of the AFM tips
from the substrates (Figure 2(e)). The resulting pull-off force,
F, is a measure of the adhesion. It is given by Hooke’s law
F ¼ kd; (1)
where k is the stiffness of the AFM cantilever and d is the
displacement of the AFM tip at the onset of pull-off (represented
as the length, EA in Figure 2(a)). Measurements of
such pull-off forces have been applied in biology.30–33 They
have been shown to be sufficient to detect the differences
between breast cancer cells and normal breast cells in recent
work by Meng et al.,25 who studied the adhesive interactions
between the breast specific EphA2 antibodies and receptors
on breast cancer or normal breast cells. Meng et al.25 also
studied the adhesion between luteinizing hormone releasing
hormone (LHRH) peptides and their receptors on breast cancer
and normal breast cells. Their results show that the pulloff
forces associated with breast cancer cells and
LHRH/EphA2, which are over-expressed in breast cancer
cells,34,35 are about five times the adhesion to normal breast
cells.25
It is important to note here that although the above
results suggest that force microscopy can be used to measure
the adhesive forces between the constituents of nanoclusters,
there have been no prior efforts to use force microscopy to
measure the adhesion between gold nanoparticles and the
constituents of nanoclusters that are being designed for the
specific detection and treatment of cancer via localized
chemotherapy and hyperthermia. This will be explored in
this study using a model nanocomposite system (Figure 1)
that can deliver the anti-cancer drug, paclitaxel, while providing
the basis for thermo-chemotherapy, by localized
hyperthermia via plasmon resonance with optically tunable
gold nanoparticle cores.
FIG. 1. Possible schematics of a nanoparticle-based drug delivery/detection system.
III. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Materials
The gold nanoparticles were purchased from Nanopartz
Inc. (Loveland, CO), while the uncoated AFM tips were procured
from Veeco (Memphis, TN). Paclitaxel was obtained
from Parenta Pharmaceuticals (West Colombia, SC), while
LHRH was purchased from Thermo Scientific (Waltham,
MA). The Breast Specific Antibody (BSA) and thiols were
obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO).
B. AFM experiments
1. AFM tip and substrate coating/characterization
A simple dip-coating method25 was used to coat the
AFM tips. The bare AFM tips were dip-coated with either
gold nanoparticles, LHRH or BSA. This was done by
immersing them into their respective solutions for about 10 s
to maximize the AFM tip surface contact with the solution.
The tips were then air-dried for less than a minute, after
which they were dipped for a second time, again for 10 s.
This procedure was repeated 3–5 times to complete the coating
process. The nanoparticle concentrations in solution
ranged from 22 to 46 ppm. These were used in the asreceived
condition. Similarly, the BSA, thiols and LHRH
solutions were used, as provided by the vendors, at a concentration
of 0.5 mg/ml.
Subsequently, the coated AFM tips were air-dried for a
minimum of 24 h. They were then observed under a scanning
electron microscope. The paclitaxel, LHRH, and BSA substrates
were prepared by spreading each of the solutions on
glass sheets to form thin layers. These were then allowed to
dry in air for a minimum of 24 h. The surface morphologies
of the coated substrates and the uncoated glass substrates
(control surfaces)36 were then characterized using a
Dimension 3100 Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) that was
operated in the tapping mode (Dimension 3100, Bruker
Instruments, Woodbury, NY, USA).
In order to confirm that the AFM tip samples were
coated with gold nanoparticles, the coated and bare tips were
imaged under a Phillips Model FEI XL30 field emission gun
scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Phillips Electronics
N.V., Eindhoven, The Netherlands). The images were
obtained using secondary electron imaging. The images of
the coated AFM tips were obtained before and after the
AFM experiments. In this way, possible detachment or
delamination of the coatings was observed on the coated
AFM tips.
Hence, since pull-off forces were only accepted for
cases in which the coatings were still present after the pulloff
experiments, the measured pull-off forces were confirmed
to be due to the intended bi-material pairs. The spring
constants of the coated and uncoated tips were measured
using the thermal tune method.37,38 This was measured
because the actual spring constants are needed to obtain the
true adhesion forces from Eq. (1). This also accounts for
batch-to-batch variations in the spring constants, as well as
the effects of coatings on the cantilever stiffness.25,36 The
pull-off measurements were obtained under ambient conditions
(room temperature of 22–23 oC and a relative humidity
of 40–45%).
2. AFM force-displacement measurements
The interactions between the gold nanoparticle-coated
AFM tips and the cell substrates or between the components
of the drug delivery systems were measured using a
Multimode Dimension DI Nanoscope IIIa Atomic Force
Microscope (Bruker Instruments, Woodbury, NY, USA).
The measurements were obtained under ambient conditions
and relative humidity (40–45%). The photodetector sensitivity
was calibrated on a stiff quartz surface before force microscopy
measurements.39 The Veeco probes were made
from uncoated phosphorus (n)-doped silicon. They have a tip
radius of curvature of 30 nm. For each pair of interactions,
150 adhesion measurements were obtained from 3 AFM tips
with 50 measurements obtained for each tip at 5 different
positions on the substrate.
Table I shows the different pairs used.
TABLE I. Substrates and coated tips used in AFM study.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. AFM tip and substrate characterization
Back-scattered SEM images of the uncoated and
dip-coated AFM tips are presented in Figures 3(a)–3(g). The
images show tips before and after the AFM adhesion
measurements. A typical uncoated AFM tip is shown in
Figure 3(a). This shows that the bare tip is evenly smooth
along the corners and surfaces of the tip. However, in the
case of the coated tips, corners and apexes are covered with
coatings that disrupt the smoothness of the surfaces.
Typical AFM images of the dip-coated AFM tips are
presented in Figures 3(b)–3(f). These show the surface
morphologies of AFM tips that are coated with nanoscale
layers of gold (Figure 3(b)), LHRH (Figure 3(c)), EphA2
breast specific antibody (Figure 3(d)). Furthermore, no evidence
of coating delamination was observed on the surfaces
of the coated AFM tips that were used in the pull-off
experiments. Hence, the measured pull-off forces are due
to interactions between the coated AFM tips and the
substrates.
FIG. 3. Sample SEM Images of the AFM tips: (a) Bare AFM tip; (b) Gold
nanoparticles-coated AFM tip before adhesion measurement; (c) Gold
nanoparticles-coated AFM tip after adhesion measurement; (d) LHRH-coated
AFM tip before adhesion measurement; (e) LHRH-coated AFM tip after adhesion
measurement; (f) BSA-coated AFM tip before adhesion measurement;
(g) BSA-coated AFM tip after adhesion measurement. Boxes show coating on
apex tip and side edges.
B. Adhesion forces
Figure 4 shows a typical force-displacement plot for the
adhesion between gold nanoparticles and LHRH. This plot
has characteristics similar to the idealization presented in
Figure 2. By multiplying the pull-off deflections with the tip
stiffness shown in Table II, the pull-off forces were obtained.
There were no measurable forces for the control samples.
The adhesive force interactions between the different
components of the designer drug delivery system (shown in
Figure 1) are presented in Figure 5. The adhesion forces
between the gold nanoparticles and LHRH and between gold
nanoparticles and BSA are comparable and stronger than
those obtained for paclitaxel-gold, paclitaxel-antibody or
paclitaxel-LHRH complexes.
The weakest adhesive interactions within the drug nanocomposite
systems (Figure 5) are with the drug (paclitaxel).
These interactions result in pull-off forces of about 10 nN,
compared to those without the drug (F~58 nN). This suggests
that the robustness of such systems will depend highly
on the drug-component interactions.
These above adhesion forces are generally related to
Van der Waal’s forces, with relatively large and short range
interactions between the different components. Also, it can
be observed that similar adhesion forces were obtained for
the LHRH and BSA coated tips when measured against the
same substrate (60 nN against gold and 10 nN against
paclitaxel). This may be due to the amino acid sequence
present in the peptide and polypeptide structures in the
LHRH and BSA, respectively. The overall adhesion forces
would, therefore, depend on the charge distributions and
positions of the amino acid residues in the peptide and polypeptide
structures of the LHRH and BSA structures.
The AFM force microscopy results (Figure 5) also show
that gold nanoparticles are strongly attracted to biological
compounds. The pull-off forces for gold-LHRH and gold-
AB pairs are 6063 nN and 5763 nN, respectively. These
forces are presented in Table III.
These are far greater than those between gold and paclitaxel,
which is 1260.6 nN. In contrast, there are weak adhesive
interactions between paclitaxel and the molecular
recognition units, LHRH and Antibody. The adhesive forces
obtained for these interactions are 1061 nN and 961 nN,
respectively. The results are shown in Table IV.
The adhesion forces between taxol and gold, as well as
taxol and thiol are generally less than the other interactions
within the nanocomposite drug delivery system. Hence, the
current results show that the drug is the weak link in the
nanocomposite system. Careful nanocluster engineering
must, therefore, be carried out to prevent the inadvertent
release of the drug, paclitaxel, before it is delivered to the tumor
sites for controlled release and the treatment of cancer
cells/tumor tissue.
Furthermore, the results show that the presence of thiols
plays an important role in the overall robustness of the system.
Figures 6–8 reflect increased adhesion forces, when
compared with those with gold. In Figure 6, the thiolantibody
couple has an adhesion force of 320640 nN,
which is about three times the adhesion force between gold
and the breast specific antibody. These results are summarized
in Table V.
FIG. 4. Typical AFM force-displacement behavior for coated tips on substrates.
TABLE II. Spring constants of the bare and coated tips.
FIG. 5. Adhesion interactions of components in a drug delivery system.
TABLE III. Comparison of adhesion interactions for LHRH with and without
thiols.
TABLE IV. Comparison of adhesion interactions for paclitaxel (taxol) with
antibody, gold or LHRH.
FIG. 6. Comparison of adhesion interactions for Gold with and without
thiols.
TABLE V. Comparison of adhesion interactions for Gold with and without
thiols.
Also, the adhesion force between thiol and gold is found
to be almost double that between the gold and the BSA.
These results clearly indicate a significant increase in the adhesive
interactions when thiol is introduced between the gold
and BSA. The increased adhesion forces between gold and
thiol can be attributed to covalent bonds. Gold is known to
form stable complexes with ligands which have “soft” or
polarizable electron donating atoms such as phosphorus or
sulfur.40 Similarly, the stronger adhesive forces between
BSA and thiol may be attributed to amine-thiol interactions.
Similar results were obtained for LHRH interactions.
These resulted in a three-fold increase in the adhesion forces
of gold-thiol structures, when compared with those of
uncoated gold structures (Figure 7). Furthermore, the adhesion
forces between gold and paclitaxel are about six times
greater when thiols are present (Figure 8). The current
results, therefore, confirm that thiols can improve the robustness
of gold nanoparticle clusters, as is expected from prior
work reported in the literature.41,42 The current results are
also presented in Table VI.
The above results suggest that, with the exception of
thiol-taxol interactions, the interactions between thiol and
the other chemical species (LHRH, EphA2 and gold) generally
result in increased adhesion. These results are shown in
Table VII.
The observed increase in adhesion forces (in the presence
of thiols) is attributed to the effects of secondary bonds
(Van der Waals forces or hydrogen bonds). Furthermore, the
statistical variations in the measured adhesion forces seem to
be less in the cases where the number of molecular species
on the AFM tips are fewer. However, in cases with increased
numbers of available molecular species on the AFM tips
(taxol and LHRH), the variabilities in the measured adhesion
forces may depend on the coverage of the AFM tips and the
orientations of the molecules on the AFM tips and the substrates.
Further work is clearly needed to explore the effects
of molecular orientation and AFM tip coverage on the measured
adhesion forces. These are clearly some of the challenges
for future work.
The reasons for the variations in error ranges in the adhesion
force measurements are not fully understood at the
moment. We also note that the adhesive interactions between
relatively large antibodies and gold nanoparticles result in
smaller statistical variations, while those between organic
structures with many possible sites of interactions result in
larger variations in adhesive force.
Finally in this section, Figure 9 provides a comparison
of the forces obtained for the different component pairs with
thiols. As reported previously,43 proteins have the strongest
affinity to thiols due to the possible disulfide intermolecular
interactions.
Covalent bonds between gold and thiols40 may be responsible
for these strong adhesive interactions. Furthermore, the
paclitaxel-thiol bi-material pair results in the smallest pull-off
forces, suggesting the presence weak Van der Waal’s
interactions.
FIG. 7. Comparison of adhesion interactions for LHRH with and without
thiols.
FIG. 8. Comparison of adhesion interactions for Paclitaxel (taxol) with and
without thiols.
TABLE VI. Comparison of adhesion interactions for LHRH with and without
thiols.
TABLE VII. Comparison of adhesion interactions of the nanocomposite
components with thiols.
FIG. 9. Comparison of adhesion interactions of the nanocomposite components
with thiols.
V. IMPLICATIONS
The implications of the current work are quite significant.
They suggest that nanoparticles, peptides and antibodies
can be coated on micro-cantilever tips and used to
measure adhesion interactions that are relevant to drug delivery
systems. Hence, the pairwise adhesive interactions
between the drug components can be measured using force
microscopy techniques. However, there is a need for further
work to explore the extent to which the AFM adhesion measurements
may vary due to interactions with liquids and different
solvents that are relevant to in-vitro and in-vivo
environments. In-vitro and in-vivo studies are also needed to
understand the level to which the AFM adhesion measurements
can be related to nanoparticle-drug component interactions
and binding under experimental and clinical
conditions. These are clearly some of the challenges for
future work.
Based on the sizes of the rounded AFM tips with tip
radii of about 30 nm, we estimate a total hemi-spherical volume
of about 5656 nm2 is available for the adhesive interactions
with the substrates. Hence, in the case of the EphA2
antibodies, if we estimate the surface areas of the molecules
to be approximately 1000 nm2, then we would expect to
have about 5.7 molecules interacting with the substrates.
Consequently, partial coverage of the tip rounded AFM tips
should result in about 3–5 molecules per rounded AFM tip.
In the case of the smaller LHRH peptides, with surface areas
of about 36 nm2, about 157 LHRH peptides can be attached
to the rounded AFM tip, if it is fully covered. Similarly, the
interactions with the taxol drug molecule with a surface area
of 100 nm2 could result in about 57 taxol molecules on the
rounded AFM tip.
Furthermore, it is also clear that the adhesion methods
that were used in this study can be used to screen the effectiveness
of potential binding chemistry and coated nanoparticle
targets before conducting expensive in-vitro and in-vivo
studies that are needed for clinical use. However, the relatively
weak bonds between the anti-cancer drugs (paclitaxel)
suggest that nanocluster fragmentation may occur during
transportation in the bloodstream to the target organs. Since
such fragmentation may result in premature drug release
from the nanoparticle clusters (before they reach the
intended tumor tissue/target organs), there is a need for further
experimental and computational work to study the resistance
of the nanoparticle clusters to fragmentation under
in-vitro and in-vivo conditions. Nevertheless, the results of
the current study show clearly that thiols improve the adhesion
between the constituents of nanoclusters that are
relevant to early cancer detection and the localized treatment
of cancer via hyperthermia and localized drug release.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
This paper presents the results of an experimental study
of the adhesion forces between components of a model
generic drug delivery/system that includes gold nanoparticles,
paclitaxel, thiols, LHRH and as breast-specific antibody,
BSA. The results confirm that the robustness of such
systems depends on the adhesion to paclitaxel, which is the
weak link. In such cases, it is important to design nanoparticle
clusters in which adhesion to the drug is increased to
prevent premature release. The results suggest that the force
microscopy technique can be used to rank the adhesion
between different species in drug nanocomposites that are
being developed to treat breast cancer and other forms of
cancer. They also show that the presence of thiols can significantly
increase the adhesive forces between gold and the
molecular recognition units or the drugs in these systems.
Furthermore, the current work provides a tool for fast screening
of potential binding chemistry for ligand conjugated
nanoparticles that can also be used for cancer detection and
treatment. Further work is clearly needed to measure the adhesion
forces in biological environments and clinical
settings.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Science
Foundation (Grant No DMR 0231418), the Princeton Grand
Challenges Program, the World Bank STEP B Program, the
World Bank African Centers of Excellence Program and the
African Development Bank. The authors are grateful to these
agencies for their financial support and encouragement. We
would also like to extend our appreciation to Wali Akande,
Rose Ndong and Tiffany Tong for their assistance in the
AFM measurements.
