Biological Psychology 34 (1992) 93-130
Research methods for measurement of heart rate
and respiration
Stephen W. Porges and Evan A. Byrne
UniLwsity of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA

Strategies for heart rate and respiration quantification are dependent upon a knowledge of
physiology and statistics. To develop appropriate and sensitive psychophysiological measures, it
is necessary to understand the neural control of the autonomic nervous system and the statistical
characteristics of physiological data. Moreover, it is proposed that inferences derived from
physiological measures are dependent upon a statistical interaction between the characteristics
of the physiological data and the measurement techniques. The steps required to analyze heart
rate and respiration data are presented, ranging from data acquisition and editing to data
analysis and physiological inference. A variety of techniques are described and contrasted with
recommendations for future research.
Keywords: Heart rate, heart rate variability, respiration, autonomic nervous system, vagus,
methodology, analysis techniques, time-series analysis, frequency-domain analysis,
filtering.
1. Why measure heart rate, heart rate variability and respiration?
The measurement of cardio-pulmonary variables provides important information
regarding both metabolic and central nervous system activity. Interest
in monitoring breathing and cardiac variables has changed historically. Early
work focused on the use of these variables as indicators of viability. Cessation
of breathing and heart beat have been used in clinical definitions of death.
Moreover, medical evaluations of health have always emphasized the quality
of breathing and the rhythm of the heart beat. For a review of these issues
see a textbook on medical physiology (e.g. Guyton, 1976).
Theoretical models based upon systematic observations of these variables
have related cardio-pulmonary function to energy delivery. Research in areas
such as exercise physiology and behavioral medicine has resulted in the
identification of lawful relationships between both pulmonary and cardiac
variables and metabolic activity (e.g. Obrist, 1981).
More recently, research has focused on the neural mediation of the
cardiac responses, how the pulmonary system interacts with cardiac responses,
and how these variables are influenced by mental states, physiological
stress, health status and drugs. Clinical monitoring of heart rate and
respiration variables has been used in critical settings to evaluate both health
status and response to various medical treatments including anesthesia and
drugs (e.g. Porges, 19911.
This paper will focus on heart rate variables. Respiration will be discussed
as a system which interacts with heart rate. A discussion of cognitive and
affective influences on autonomic responses, implicitly assumes a direct
relationship between central nervous system processes and the regulation of
autonomic function. This leads to the study of the neurophysiological pathways
regulating autonomic responses. Thus, the study of heart rate patterns,
regardless of whether the heart rate patterns are physiological indicators of
metabolic, cognitive, or affective processes, requires an understanding of
specific central nervous system structures.
2. Neural control of the heart
2.1. Historical
Interest in the role neural modulation of the heart contributes to emotion
and stress was stated by Darwin (1872).
. . . when the mind is strongly excited, we might expect that it would
instantly affect in a direct manner the heart.. . when the heart is
affected it reacts on the brain; and the state of brain again reacts
through the pneumo-gastric [vagus] nerve on the heart; so that under
any excitement there will be much mutual action and reaction between
these, the two most important organs of the body. (p. 69).
In this statement Darwin has provided us with both an organizing variable
and a measurement index. First, he suggested that the nervous system
mediates the interaction between psychological and physiological phenomena.
Second, he identified the pneumo-gastric nerve (vagus) as a physiological
system sensitive to this interaction. Current research on cardiovascular
reactivity assumes neural modulation via the vagus and sympathetic nerves.
Similarly, research indexing risk or stress with measures of cardiac vagal tone
is driven by the assumed relationship between the central nervous system and
the vagal control of the heart (Porges, 1985al.
Interest in vagal control as a regulatory mechanism in the expression of
individual differences in autonomic dysfunction is not new. Eppinger and
Hess (1915) introduced the concept of vagal tone as an individual difference
in their monograph entitled Kzgotonia. Eppinger and Hess described a form
of autonomic dysfunction for which there was no known anatomical basis.
It is often &satisfactory for the physician.. . to find that he must be
content to make a diagnosis of “Neurosis”. The symptomatology and
the impossibility of establishing any anatomical basis for the disease
always remain the most conspicuous points in formulating the diagnosis
of a neurosis of an internal organ. (p. 1)
The objective of their monograph was to identify a physiological substrate
which could explain this anomaly and thus provide the mechanisms for a
variety of clinically observed neuroses. Eppinger and Hess, like Darwin,
speculated “that in the central nervous system there exists some common
center which controls the antagonistic actions.. . ” of the autonomic nervous
system. They assumed that this central mechanism was manifested in stable
individual differences the amplitude of respiratory mediated heart rate
patterns.
. . . clinical facts, such as respiratory arrhythmia, habitual bradycardia,
etc., have furnished the means of drawing our attention to the variations
in the tonus of the vagal system in man.
Although Eppinger and Hess were interested in clinical medicine, their
case studies described a relationship between a problem in the regulation of
autonomic function that did not have an identifiable morphological correlate.
Their observations are relevant to our interest in the interface between
behavior and physiology in clinical medicine for four important reasons:
(11 they alerted us to the importance of the autonomic nervous system in
mediating atypical physiological responses;
(2) they related individual differences in physiology to individual differences
in psychiatric pathology (i.e. neuroses);
(3) they recognized the pharmacological sensitivity of the vagal system to
cholinergic agents, thereby potentially identifying pharmacological treatments;
(4) they brought to the attention of the medical community the commonality
of the vagal innervation of various peripheral organs and thus a possible
common explanation for a number of clinical disorders.
The history of research and theory on the autonomic nervous system has
passed through various stages. In earlier physiological research the autonomic
nervous system has been relegated to a “vegetative” status and
assumed to be relatively independent of the higher brain processes associated
with psychological states. This, of course, was not true. Psychophysiology as a
discipline has evolved in direct response to these faulty assumptions. The
autonomic nervous system has direct innervation by the cranial nerves. The
output from cranial nerves is modulated not only by peripheral feedback
from the viscera, but also from direct cortical and subcortical structures.
Autonomic processes can be conditioned and are continuously influenced by
higher brain structures. For example, vagal influences on the heart change
during psychological processes, including cognitive and affective processes,
and physiological stress associated with exercise and fever.
2.2. Feedback loops, cariability and oscillations
An understanding of how physiological systems function and interact is
extremely important to psychophysiologists. Before one can attempt to define
physiological response variables, it is important to understand the topography
of naturally occurring physiological response patterns as well as the interactive
relationship between various responses. For example, it is necessary to
know the latency of a physiological response system before it can be employed
in specific research paradigms. It is possible, via operational definitions,
to quantify time periods of a physiological system which will not be
sensitive to the psychophysiological processes being investigated.
Since heart rate is neurally mediated, it has been proposed that the
monitoring of heart rate will provide a sensitive indicator of the central
nervous system status. Many researchers have proposed that the neurally
mediated oscillations in the heart rate pattern reflect a variety of mental
states, including stress, emotion, consciousness or alertness, and attention.
Thus, the measurement of heart rate patterns may provide a “window to. the
brain” and may be used as an index of general central nervous system status.
Autonomic response systems are continuously being regulated via complex
feedback. Feedback loops typical of many homeostatic processes produce a
rhythmic pattern characterized by phasic increases and decreases in neural
efferent output to organs such as the heart. Often, as in the case of heart
rate, there are numerous feedback influences and, thus, the response is
composed of the sum of numerous rhythmic components. In many physiological
systems, efficient neural control is manifest as rhythmic physiological
variability. Within normal parameters greater amplitude of oscillation is
associated with health. Thus, the amplitude of rhythmic physiological processes
may index the status of the individual’s nervous system and capacity to
respond. In other words, the greater the amplitude of “organized” rhythmic
physiological variability, the greater the response potential or possible range
of behavior. Individuals with attenuated physiological variability would then
exhibit a lack of physiological and behavioral flexibility in response to
environmental demands.
Heart rate in the healthy adult is not constant. The pattern of heart rate
reflects the continuous feedback between the central nervous system and the
peripheral autonomic receptors. One of the principal objectives in the study
of heart rate variability (HRV) is to decode the complex pattern into
measurable and interpretable components. The feedback system between the
central control of autonomic processes in the medulla and the heart produces
phasic increases and decreases in neural efferent output via the vagus. In
most sitnations, like other measures of homeostatic function, the greater the
range of the phasic increases and decreases, the “healthier” the individual.
For example, with the aging process or with severe stress, there is an
attenuation of the range of homeostatic function. Paralleling this process is a
reduction in HRV (e.g. Lipsitz, Mietus, Moody & Goldberger, 1990, for
aging).
The efficiency of neural control may be manifested in rhythmic physiological
variability and may portray the status of the individual and individual’s
capacity and range to behave. In terms of heart rate patterns, the greater the
organized rhythmic physiological variability, the greater the range (and potential
complexity) of behavior. Individuals with attenuated physiological
variability, would then exhibit a lack of behavioral flexibility in response to
environmental demands. Although average heart rate seems to be a relatively
accurate index of metabolic activity, the topography of the heart rate pattern
provides additional information regarding the continuous neural feedback
between the cardiovascular system and the higher central nervous system
structures.
HRV is a complex and often ambiguous construct. It has had numerous
definitions as well as quantification methods. Most of these methods have
been empirically based descriptive statistics (e.g. standard deviation, mean
successive difference, range, log variance etc). Interest in statistical assumptions
and underlying physiological mechanisms has only recently influenced
the quantification of HRV. Since HRV has numerous mediators, the same
level of HRV quantified by descriptive statistics could be mediated by a
variety of combinations of neural and extra-neural influences.
Heart rate exhibits oscillations in a number of frequencies including
frequencies associated with respiratory drive and blood pressure regulation.
Knowledge of these feedback systems with their time constants is a prerequisite
for the definition of a quantification procedure. Since mean and variance
statistics are insensitive to rhythmicity, alternative methods of quantification
and analysis are necessary to describe these relationships accurately.
Little knowledge of physiology is necessary to understand the rational for
descriptive measures of respiration (i.e. rate and volume or amplitude) and
average heart rate. These measures have been intuitively linked to a metabolic
metaphor in which the heart is viewed as a furnace which requires oxygen via
respiration. In contrast, HRV is not intuitively understood and requires an
understanding of both neuro-physiology and statistics. Since HRV is determined
by complex physiological interactions and feedback systems, an understanding
of physiology is necessary to design the quantitative methods to
extract specific neurally mediated components. It is assumed that these
neurally mediated components will exhibit greater sensitivity to psychological
phenomena. Moreover, an understanding of statistical assumptions inherent
in each quantitative method is demanded to insure that faulty inference is
not made.
3. Review of existing literature: An overview
3.1. Heart rate variability and vagal control of heart rate
The self-perception of heart rate changes in response to psychological
manipulations or situational contexts has been known since man has been
able to express himself. Yet, the ability to study these assumed relationships
has been limited to our ability to quantify physiological data. The study of
heart rate levels has been clearly linked to metabolic activity in the area of
exercise physiology. The study of reactivity in heart rate levels in response to
psychological demands is the focus of much research assessing stress responses
and cardiovascular vulnerability (Krantz & Manuck, 1984).
Additional information can be extracted by describing the variability of
heart rate. HRV is assumed to be reflect regulation via the sympathetics and
the vagus. The calculation of variance statistics to describe HRV does not
provide information regarding the component neural sources. A more sensitive
approach is to partition the variance into periodic components. For
example, a sensitive index of vagal tone can be derived from the calculation
of the heart rate rhythmicity associated with the respiratory system (i.e.
respiratory sinus arrhythmia). For a review of the physiology and a summary
of research dealing with the validation of respiratory sinus arrhythmia as an
index of vagal tone see Porges, McCabe and Yongue (1982) and Porges
(1986).
With technological advances the measurement of heart rate patterns has
become more detailed. Early research merely counted the number of heart
pulses per unit time. The invention of the electrocardiogram (ECG) provided
a method to determine the electrical manifestation of myocardial function
and enabled more detailed measurement of the timing between sequential
heart beats. Instrument tape recorders provided a storage media for the
ECG. The availability of laboratory computers with advanced statistics now
allows us to describe complex heart rate patterns. As the technology has
improved, it is now becoming clear that even small gradations in the heart
rate pattern provide important information regarding neural modulation. It is
this emphasis on pattern, as opposed to rate, that has been incorporated in
the literature on HRV.
The cardiac vagal tone index (V> is a measure dependent upon knowledge
of both physiology and statistics (Porges, 1985b, 1986; Porges, McCabe &
Yongue, 1982). The vagal tone index is one measure of the nervous system
modulation of heart rate activity via the vagus. The vagal tone index reflects
rhythmic vagal efferent influences on the pacemaker modulated by respiratory
processes in the medulla. Heart rate patterns, like behavioral processes,
are dependent upon the status of the nervous system and the quality of
neural feedback. Thus, measures of cardiac vagal tone provide an important
window into the central control of autonomic processes and by inference the
central processes necessary for organized behavior.
Vagal tone is reflected in the amplitude of a heart rate rhythm associated
with frequency of spontaneous breathing. This rhythmic process, respiratory
sinus arrhythmia (RSA), has been observed and studied for more than a
century. Speculations regarding the neural mechanisms were reported as
early as 1910 when a relation between RSA and vagal tone was proposed by
Hering (1910). Hering clearly stated that, “. . . it is known with breathing that
a demonstrable lowering of heart rate.. . is indicative of the function of the
vagi”. Derivations of this method with paced breathing techniques are
currently used to diagnose peripheral neuropathy in diabetic patients.
Contemporary research has provided empirical evidence that the amplitude
of RSA accurately maps the efferent influence of the vagus nerve on the
heart. Based upon electrophysiological studies of vagal efferents, it has been
proposed that respiration gates the source nuclei of the vagal cardioinhibitory
fibers (Lopes & Palmer, 1976).
If vagal tone is a sensitive index of the functional status of the nervous
system, then we would predict that individuals with greater vagal tone would
exhibit a greater range of competent behaviors. We would also expect that
conditions that compromise the central nervous system (e.g. medical complications,
anesthesia and illness) would result in an attenuation of vagal tone.
Consistent with the above predictions, lower vagal tone has been observed in
samples of high risk versus full-term healthy neonates (Fox & Porges, 1985;
Porges, 1983, 1988). Moreover, within both healthy and high risk samples
neonatal vagal tone has been related to motor and mental development
during the first 2 years of life (Fox & Porges, 1985; Larson, Porges &
DiPietro, 1990).
In other studies it has been demonstrated that early “biobehavioral”
events such as breast feeding have profound influences on the neural control
of the heart and parallel behavior. Healthy full term neonates whose mothers
elected to breast feed had higher cardiac vagal tone on the second day
post-partum and were more behavioral reactive (DiPietro, Larson & Porges,
1987). These influences, which cannot be accounted for by socio-economic
status, were still related to individual differences in developmental outcome
at 15 months of age.
The vagal system is responsive to the changing needs of the organism.
Often the vagal system will respond by selectively increasing or decreasing its
influence on the periphery. This might be observed as a withdrawal of vagal
tone to increase heart rate to support metabolic demands or an increase in
vagal tone to regulate digestive polypeptides and gastric motility. The adaptive
success of the young infant appears to be related to the ability of the
autonomic nervous system to respond appropriately to environmental and
interval challenges. For example, during painful medical manipulations, such
as circumcision, vagal tone is suppressed (Porter, Porges & Marshall, 1988).
In contrast, during gavage feeding of premature neonates, vagal tone is
increased (DiPietro & Porges, 1991). If infants exhibited a vagal tone increase
during gavage feeding and a depression of vagal tone below pre-gavage
levels following feeding, they were discharged approximately two weeks
sooner than the infants who did not exhibit this response. These effects were
independent of birthweight, gestational age at birth and other clinical factors.
Although pre-gavage vagal tone was not related to the response pattern or
discharge, it did predict weight gain trajectories. Thus, vagal reactivity
provides another dimension related to clinical risk.
Measures of vagal tone provide an important window to central modulation
of autonomic function. Measures of vagal tone during sleep or non-challenging
conditions provide an index of normal homeostatic feedback. In
contrast, measures of vagal reactivity to sensory, visceral, or cognitive challenges
indicate the adaptive functioning of the nervous system. Thus, both
low levels of vagal tone and atypical vagal reactivity are associated with
unhealthy or maladaptive populations.
From a psychobiological perspective, the selection of a physiological
marker variable should be theoretically related to the observed behaviors.
Baseline or pre-task HRV measures have been justified because they reflect
continuous neural modulation of the heart. It is assumed that the heart rate
patterns reflect homeostatic mechanisms mediated by the brainstem structures
and index the organism’s potential to react to stimulation via transitory
inhibition of homeostatic processes and to self-regulate via the reinstatement
of homeostasis. However, the specific central structures mediating the pattern
have been debated.
Physiological research supports the notion that heart rate patterns are
predominantly mediated via the vagus (Levy & Martin, 1977). No research
has demonstrated that the heart rate oscillations reflect sympathetic state or
limbic activation, independent of secondary interactions with the vagal systern.
However, slow heart rate oscillations have been proposed to reflect
vagal modulation of sympathetic tone (Hayano et al., 1990), although the
amplitude of these oscillations does not provide a reliable index of sympathetic
tone (Saul, Rea, Eckberg, Berger & Cohen, 1990).
Limbic activation can influence HRV. The central nucleus of the amygdala,
a limbic structure, has direct inhibitory pathways to the cells of origin of
the vagus. Although the sympathetics and the limbic system obviously play a
role in emotion and perhaps temperament, the measurement of heart rate
and HRV are not variables of choice to evaluate the limbic-sympathetic
model. In contrast, research has reliably demonstrated that most HRV is
mediated via the vagus. Studies employing vagal blockade have demonstrated
a virtual removal of all HRV (e.g. Dellinger, Taylor & Porges, 1987).
Vagotonic theories have a long history in psychosomatic medicine. These
theories speculate that vagal mechanisms are responsible for many physiological
disorders which may be precipitated by social-emotional stimuli. For
example, Eppinger and Hess (1915) postulated that a hyper-reactive vagal
system was responsible for many of the observed “neuroses”. Similarly, vagal
tone has been speculated as contributing to panic attacks (George et al.,
1989), asthma (Harm, 1967) and regulatory problems (DeGangi, DiPietro,
Greenspan & Porges, 1991).
3.2. Respiration
Early research investigating the psychophysiological correlates of respiration
reported shifts in respiratory frequency and amplitude during various
psychological manipulations. A section in Woodworth’s (1938) classic textbook,
Experimental Psychology, is dedicated to the measurement of breathing
records. Three variables are described: rate, amplitude and inspiration-expiration
ratio. Early research is described relating muscular exercise to
increases in both respiration rate and amplitude. Woodworth references the
earlier research by Rehwoldt (1911) who demonstrated that excitement
produced an increase in respiration.
In a comprehensive review, Grossman (1983) characterizes respiration rate
increases occurring during stressful conditions. Consistent with this view,
increases in respiration rate have been reported for a variety of short-duration
mental tasks (Allen & Crowell, 1989; Porges & Raskin, 1969). In
contrast, Miller and Ditto (1988) documented a decrease in respiration rate
during a 15 min video game task. Lastly, respiration rate was reported to
decrease across a 25 min period during a serial reaction-time task (Thackray,
Jones & Touchstone, 1973). The dichotomous pattern of results reported for
respiration response may be a function of the nature of the mental task or
stressor employed. Respiration rate increases appear to be correlated with
stressful attention conditions whereas rate decreases may be indicative of a
decrease or lapse in attention while on task.
Although respiration is, perhaps, the most obvious of all physiological
variables observed in psychophysiological research, there have been difficulties
in its quantification. The position and type of transducer used, the time
constant of the amplifier, and the method of quantification will all affect
measurement. Also, respiration measurements may be contaminated by
movement and talking. Some methods provide an accurate and physiologitally 
valid measure of amplitude (i.e. tidal volume), while other methods
provide only information regarding rate.
Interest in respiration has been linked to research on metabolic demands.
Although respiration was commonly monitored in early psychophysiological
research, much of the current use of the variable is in exercise physiology.
However, respiratory function does influence neural mediation of heart rate.
For example, the respiratory process modulates the vagal efferent action to
the heart. Thus, it rhythmically attenuates the vagal influence producing a
rhythmic increase and decrease in heart rate at the same frequency as
respiration.
3.3. Quantification of heart rate patterns
Heart rate patterns are complicated and often idiosyncratic time series.
The beat-to-beat pattern is continuously influenced by the changing neural
influence from the brainstem to the heart. Although slow shifts in heart rate
may be influenced by sympathetic and endocrine systems, the rapid oscillations
reflecting direct neural feedback from the respiratory system are
mediated only via direct vagal output. Thus, the procedures selected to
quantify HRV are critical both in extracting physiologically meaningful
components and in building a plausible biopsychological model relating
individual differences in physiological activity to behavior.
There are two basic approaches to the quantification of HRV: (1) the
unrestricted use of descriptive statistics (i.e. range, standard deviation, variance,
etc); and (2) the modelling of the heart rate pattern to extract a
variance component determined by known physiological mechanisms (e.g.
RSA). While both approaches will produce a final descriptive statistic, the
unrestricted approach is influenced by the duration of the data sampled, the
mean level and the complex interactions of sympathetic and parasympathetic
influences on overall variability.
More sophisticated descriptive methods have been developed and used by
researchers in obstetrics and pediatrics (e.g. Cabal, 1987) to study fetal and
neonatal heart rate patterns. These methods partition HRV into two components
to emphasize a fast (i.e. short-term variability) and slow (i.e. long-term
variability) heart rate component. The short-term variability is generally
calculated as a standard deviation or the mean absolute difference between
sequential heart beats. Short-term variability is assumed to be associated with
vagal influences. The long-term variability is generally calculated as the
maximum minus minimum heart rate (i.e. range). Long-term variability is
assumed to reflect the “balance” between sympathetic and vagal influences.
To a limited degree short-term variability has been demonstrated to be
related to vagal influences; however, long-term variability has not been
empirically demonstrated to be related to specific sympathetic influences or a
defined “balance” between the sympathetics and the vagus.
Approaches which model the heart rate pattern have been successful in
extracting physiologically valid components from the heart rate pattern.
Porges (1985) developed a method of extracting an accurate measure of the
amplitude of RSA as an index of cardiac vagal tone ($1. This method deals
with some of the nonstationary qualities of the baseline heart rate pattern
(i.e. a violation of an assumption necessary for spectral analyses and time
domain filters), the effect of the duration of data sampled, and the interactive
effects of sympathetic, parasympathetic and endocrine systems on the
heart. This method has been validated in numerous studies across different
laboratories (Billman & Dujardin, 1990; Dellinger et. al., 1987; Porges,
McCabe & Yongue, 1982).
3.4. Attention and task demands
A number of studies have evaluated measures of HRV during tasks
requiring sustained attention. The ability to sustain attention implies an
ability to focus on relevant information, to suppress the input of irrelevant
information and to subjugate temporarily the normal homeostatic functions
and motor activity to information processing demands. In general, vagal tone
is suppressed during states of sustained attention, mental effort and organized
autonomic and behavioral responses to stress.
The suppression of HRV has been associated with enhanced performance
on reaction-time tasks with adults (Porges, 1972). Similarly, in 3-month-old
infants the suppression of vagal tone has been associated with better attention
scores (Huffman, Bryan, Pedersen & Porges, 1989). The degree of vagal
tone suppression (relative to a baselevel) occurring during the administration
of the Bayley Scales of Infant Development was significantly related to the
Mental Development Index in 8- to ll-month-old infants (DeGangi et al.,
1991). Infants who suppressed their vagal tone more during the administration
of the test had higher scores. In all the above examples, vagal tone or
HRV was depressed during states requiring sustained attention, the degree
of suppression was related to performance, and baselevel vagal tone (or
HRV) was related to both the degree of suppression and the performance.
Measures of HRV appear to be sensitive to task demands (e.g. Aasman,
Mulder & Mulder, 1987; Beh, 1990; Porges, 1972; Porges & Raskin, 1969;
Walter & Porges, 1976). In some situations it is possible to identify task
effects with the HRV measures even when average heart rate is not shifting
(e.g. Lee & Park, 1990). Moreover, the vagal tone measure has been found to
be sensitive to various drug manipulations including anesthesia, alcohol,
marihuana, morphine and cocaine (Porges, 1991; Porges & Greenspan, 1991;
Newlin, Byrne & Porges, 1990). Clinical information regarding central nervous
system status has been clearly reported with individuals receiving
neurosurgery (Donchin, Constantini, Szold, Byrne & Porges, 1992). Moreover,
vagal tone appears to index the outcome of high risk neonates (Porges,
1983). In these studies, heart rate levels seldom contribute to the prediction.
3.5. Failure and problems
Failures in cardio-respiratory psychophysiology can be clustered into two
categories: (1) lack of specificity; and (2) quantitative anomalies. Many
psychophysiologists expected cardiovascular and respiratory variables to provide
accurate and sensitive indices of specific psychological phenomena. The
Laceys’ intake-rejection hypothesis emphasized the directionality of heart
rate responses to specific stimuli. Published reports continue to argue about
the reliability of the phenomenon, the relationship between the heart rate
responses and performance, and the physiological significance of the response
(e.g. Obrist, 1981). Similarly, the interest in the intra-cycle effect as a
more accurate and more rapid manifestation of the intake-rejection model
has brought mixed results and uncertain interpretation.
Lack of quantitative standardization is a problem for both heart rate and
respiratory measures. With heart rate the problems include: rules for detecting
the onset of the heart beat, accuracy of timing between beats, rules for
artifact rejection and correction, duration of the time sampling interval (if the
interval is longer than the time between heart beats it will serve to average
and reduce variability), duration of the period used to evaluate the treatment
effect, appropriate baseline conditions, as well as standardized methods to
describe variability measures. Indeed, the lack of standardized quantification
procedures for HRV is considered to be the most significant barrier to the
acceptance of this measure beyond the experimental role in human factors
psychophysiology (O’Donnell & Eggemeier, 1986). The development of the
vagal tone index (3) was in response to some of these problems by providing
the research community with a standardized method of time sampling and
extracting a measure of RSA. The values from this method have meaning
when compared across laboratories.
With respiration variables, although there is an acknowledgement of the
importance of pulmonary function to survival as well as the sensitivity of the
system to psychological states, identification of specific dimensions and
standardized scoring procedures has been lacking. Some research suggests
that minute ventilation may be sensitive to task demands. Other research by
Schwartz and his colleagues suggests that respiration wave forms can be
synchronized and averaged in a manner similar to the electro-cortical evoked
potential (Lorig & Schwartz, 1990).
In summary, there are two major problems related to psychophysiological
measurement. First, the lack of specificity negates the ability to articulate
detailed psychological interpretation from the physiological response variables.
Second, the lack of measurement standardization limits the generalizability
of data reported in one laboratory.
4. Data collection
4.1. Heart rate and heart period
If the researcher is interested in heart rate or HRV measures, the ECG is
monitored. Since most psychophysiologists are not interested in obtaining a
clinical ECG, the selection of electrode placement and type is at the service
of obtaining the cleanest signal with the most detectable beat-by-beat information.
With actively moving subjects, it is often necessary to put electrodes
on the chest. However, in most psychophysiological paradigms in the laboratory,
placing electrodes on the limbs (e.g. both arms, or the non-dominant
arm and opposite leg) works well.
From the ECG the time interval between successive beats is calculated.
Although the heart beat actually starts on the P-wave, because of the
prominence of the R-wave most researchers quantify heart period and rate
based upon R-R intervals. For accurate quantification of psychophysiological
responses, it is imperative to obtain accurate beat-to-beat time intervals.
The accuracy is dependent upon precise detection of the peak of the R-wave
and the precision of the timing between R-R intervals. This detection may
be influenced by amplifier characteristics. For example, if high frequency
components of the ECG are excessively filtered, the R-wave is attenuated
and accurate detection of the peak of the R-wave is compromised. Alternatively,
if low frequency drift in the ECG due to breathing dominates the
record, it may influence hardware triggers.
Two approaches have been used to quantify the intervals between heart
beats (R-R intervals). The first uses a hardware trigger which detects the
level and/or slope of the R-wave. Level detectors can contribute variance to
the R-R intervals by detecting R-waves at different points relative to the
peak. Although this error is usually not great, it may contribute to breath-bybreath
variations in R-R intervals by the chest wall modulating the ECG
and, in particular, the amplitude of the R-waves when the ECG is monitored
with an AC amplifier. The second, more accurate method, uses a software
trigger based upon detecting the inflection point of the R-wave to the nearest
millisecond. It is then necessary to time the intervals between the triggered
events. Although many researchers assume that 4 or 2 ms accuracy is
sufficient, we recommend 1 ms. In our research we have demonstrated that,
with high risk populations (e.g. low birthweight premature neonates, heart
transplant patients), slight differences, within the range of _+ 1-2 ms distinguish
clinical outcome (DiPietro & Porges, 1991; Zbulit et al, 1988).
4.2. Respiration
Woodworth comments in Experimental Psychology: “Since breathing is a
massive response, there is little trouble in recording it.” This statement does
not map into the reality of psychophysiological research. There have been
many chapters and articles devoted to the subject of quantification issues for
respiratory variables (Lorig & Schwartz, 1990; Stein & Luparello, 1967).
There are two fundamental ways in which to quantify respiratory variables:
(1) indirect; (2) direct. Each method and the techniques associated with them
will be discussed below.
Methods categorized as indirect are often effective for the quantification
of relative respiratory parameters. While there are calibration techniques
available for many of these measures they must be used with care and almost
constant vigilance. Perhaps the easiest and most well-known method for
measuring respiration involves the placement of a strain gauge or air-filled
bellows around the subject’s abdomen. These methods quantify chest wall
movements. One problem is that they measure only a single “level” of the
subject’s breathing movements and if subjects switch their mode of breathing
from the abdomen to the chest or shoulder areas, accuracy is compromised.
Through the use of two or more strain gauges accuracy can be improved to
accommodate individual differences in breathing styles. When two belts are
used, one is usually placed abdominally and the other at the level of the
chest. Commercial multi-site strain gauge respiration vests are- available.
When calibrated for volume, these methods are quite accurate and reliable
for between-subject comparisons of most respiratory parameters. However,
the calibration of a strain gauge or bellows-based device is accurate only for
brief periods of time if the subject is moving or shifting position in a chair.
Following calibration, a strain gauge device will become inaccurate if the
sensor placement moves as the subject twists and turns underneath. Thus, the
utility of this form of indirect respiratory measurement is subject to question
in an environment such as a high performance aircraft where the pilot is: (A)
shifting in the seat in order to maintain visual contact with an object; (B)
subjected to any level of G-forces.
Impedance pneumography is an effective way to obtain relative, withinsubject,
respiratory parameters. In this method a high frequency (20-30 kHz)
low voltage current is passed between two electrodes. As respiratory movements
change the intrathoracic volume, corresponding impedance changes
occur. The resulting change in voltage as the subject breathes provides a
measure of respiratory rate and relative volume. One advantage of this
technique is that measures of respiration can be obtained from the ECG
electrodes. However, the method has some disadvantages as well. The type
and size of the electrode as well as the site selection and preparation are
critical to the effective use of impedance pneumography. Lorig and Schwartz
(1990) note that there has been limited application of this method in the
psychophysiological domain.
A third method which is categorized as indirect is the measurement of
temperature changes in the airflow around the nose. A thermistor probe is
an indirect measure because it is measuring a by-product of respiratory
movements, warm air, and not actual airflow itself. As a result, nasal
thermistors are best suited for quantifying respiratory rate. Other respiratory
variables collected with a nasal thermistor are speculative because of thermistor
sensitivity (e.g. response latency, temperature range, correlation between
temperature changes and airflow). In addition, thermistor sensitivity
characteristics preclude its use during many paced breathing or breath-hold
maneuvers.
When accurately calibrated and placed correctly using multiple sites (e.g.
strain gauges), indirect methods of quantifying respiratory variables can be
effective. However, each of the indirect methods incorporates assumptions
regarding the direct relevance of chest-wall movement to the respiratory
process. While most ventilatory processes involve some thoracic or shoulder
displacement, indirect measures do not lend themselves well to studies
involving breath-holds or expired gas analysis. Moreover, calibration of
indirect methods requires a task in which the subject remains stationary.
Thus, in a moving subject or a paradigm which consists of respiratory
manipulations, the psychophysiologist must use techniques which quantify
the amount of air actually entering the subject’s lungs. While direct methods
are not a panacea, they are more suited to understanding the complex
associations between cardiovascular and pulmonary regulation.
When a flowmeter is placed into a subject’s normal airflow loop, direct
measurements of respiratory variables of interest can be made. Unlike the
indirect methods which provide information relating to chest-wall movement,
direct methods of respiration recording quantify airflow entering and exiting
the lungs. As such, they are quite accurate at determining respiratory
movements and are nearly insensitive to movements such as shifting of the
body and muscle contraction.
Most flowmetric methods use either a mouthpiece with a noseclip or a
complete face mask covering the nose and mouth. Both of these methods are
compromises to the methodological utility and psychological well-being of the
subject. A mouthpiece is often difficult to size and there will be large
individual differences in subject tolerance to its presence in the mouth. The
noseclip which is required to ensure accurate airflow measurement is also
subject to tolerances and it results in an aberrant method of breathing (i.e.
through the mouth). A face mask on the other hand, is somewhat more
comfortable for the subject and allows the subject to breath through both the
mouth and nose. Unfortunately, it too may be difficult to size, there are
problems with leakage, the amount of dead space is increased, and tight seals
are difficult to obtain for subjects with facial hair without the use of
petroleum jelly. Both techniques provide the subject with amplified, multimodal
sensory feedback concerning ventilatory processes which is not characteristic
of the “natural” environment.
Airflow can either be measured mechanically using a flowmeter or
electro-mechanically using a pneumotach. When using a mechanical flowmeter,
it should be designed using low-mass impeller technology such that
reversals in airflow are accurately identified. A water-filled spirometer can be
used for gross airflow measurement, although its utility for breath-by-breath
and intra-breath measurement is quite limited. All forms of airflow measurement
allow the collection or sampling of the expired air so that gas analyses
can be easily made if the equipment is available. These expired-gas analyses
require specialized equipment and elaborate calibration procedures and their
utility in applied environment research can be questioned.
Direct methods of monitoring respiration are quite accurate but they
require some subject adaptation to their presence in the airflow. Moreover,
all methods (with the exception of nasal thermistor or impedance) will
provide the subject with sensory feedback (either somatic in the case of strain
gauge or auditory and somatic with flowmeters) which will affect the manner
in which the subject breaths. As a result, in experimental settings, it is
recommended that time is allotted for subject accommodation to the measurement
devices.
Depending on the technique for recording of the data, the researcher
should ensure that the amplified respiration signal does not exceed the
operating limits of the recorder. Consideration should also be given to
post-processing the respiration signal. With many strain gauges, the beating
of the heart and gross movement will disturb the transducer resulting in a
high frequency component on the respiratory record.
5. Data reduction and artifact control
5.1. Editing heart period data
After timing the R-R intervals, the resulting heart period data must be
processed in order to correct artifacts introduced during either the data
acquisition or the digitizing process. Artifacts left in the heart period series
will seriously distort measures of heart period variance. There are two
primary ways to accomplish the task of editing. The first is to have a trained
observer view a graph of the heart period data indexed by time. This allows
for identification of outliers. Once these outliers have been detected, the
trained observer corrects them based on a set of rules. The second method
involves artifact detection and correction algorithms performed in an automated
fashion by a computer (Berntson, Quigley, Jang & Boysen; 1990;
Cheung, 1981; Rompelman, 1986). Each method has advantages and disadvantages
and hybrid methods have been recommended to combine the
advantages of both. One example of a hybrid method would be to delegate
the detection task to the computer and the correction task to the trained
observer. The rest of this section will emphasize some of the rules employed
in manually editing heart period data.
The purpose of manual editing is to eliminate outliers which may corrupt
subsequent statistical analyses. Most outliers are generated from either
movement artifact or an error in digitizing. Occasionally a heart arrythmia
might contribute to outlier points in a file. Pattern recognition plays an
important role in manual editing and becomes easier in proportion to the
amount of data viewed. Thus, when learning this process, the most difficult
aspect for a novice editor to learn is the differentiation between artifact and
physiological process.
One common type of artifact in digitized data is created when there is
slight amplitude modulation in the R-wave coincident with respiratory movements
and a threshold detector is being used to identify R-waves. If an
R-wave is below the detection threshold for the computer, the interval timer
will continue its timing into the subsequent beat(s) until the R-wave amplitude
returns to a value above the threshold of the R-wave detector. The
resulting pattern in the data set would be a beat that is an exact integer
multiple of two or more beats. For example, if the modal heart period is
approximately 1000 ms there might be several instances of 2000 or 3000 ms
values contained in the data set. The true heart periods can be approximated
by integer division of these points. If larger integers are required for the
correction, the data should be cautiously interpreted. For example, dividing a
point of 14 000 ms by 14 is exceedingly damaging when variance measures are
subsequently extracted. If points are not even multiples of previous heart
period levels then there is the possibility that either: (1) the artifactual point
is adjacent to another artifactual point and adding these points together
before division is required or; (2) the point might be a transient physiological
phenomenon such as a bradycardia or an arrhythmia.
Individual differences in the quality of the ECG can also affect the way
heart periods are generated during the digitizing process. For example, if a
subject has a large T-wave relative to the R-wave there is the chance, when
using a threshold detector to identify the heart beat, that both the R- and the
T-wave will be considered markers that a heart beat has occurred. The result
will be two intervals generated for each true heart period. In this case, the
task of editing is to add these intervals together to reconstruct the true heart
period.
Movement may produce a series of spikes in the ECG tracing. These
spikes are often falsely detected as R-waves and may result in a number of
very short intervals for each true heart period. Again, the task of editing is to
reconstruct the true heart period by adding together the artifact intervals
within that time period.
Identification of artifacts during manual editing can be facilitated using
the concept of mechanical versus fluid changes in the heart period record.
Most artifactual points in the record will appear as abrupt angular changes
away from the “normal” or modal oscillatory pattern. In contrast with the
spiked appearance of most artifacts, true physiological phenomenon such as
a bradycardia are more gradual. Characteristically a bradycardia may take
three or more beats to reach its full magnitude (which is often not an even
multiple of the previous trend in level), and then follow a similar time course
returning to the surrounding heart period value. Before concluding that an
outlier point is an artifact two things must be checked: First, the surrounding
point values should be evaluated to get a sense of the modal pattern of
changes in the data segment; Second, the scale of the ordinate axis should be
checked to be sure that a spiky appearance is not a visual illusion produced
by a scale which is too small.
The purpose of visual scanning of the data and hand-editing is to correct
for errors resulting from movement artifact or digitizing. These types of
errors result in evenly divisible data points or bursts of short intervals which
can be added evenly (i.e. dividing 1200 ms by 4 to get a series of 300 ms;
adding a series consisting of 50, 100, 200, 200 and 50 ms to get a value of 300
ms). The key to responsible editing is knowing when to stop this process.
Certainly, if there is a point of 15000 ms in a data segment of only 30 s it
would not be advisable to edit this point or to interpret this data segment.
Likewise, if a data point cannot be added to a preceding data point or evenly
divided, it is probably a real phenomenon (i.e a transient bradycardia or
arrhythmia). Since most of the analyses discussed in this manuscript consider
the amount of variance on a beat-to-beat basis it is easy to imagine how
damaging it would be to over-edit. Good heart period data are those data in
which no editing is necessary. When presented with a file which requires
more than the occasional data point added or divided, the question must be
asked why this is occurring. The answer resides in a number of factors
including the quality of the ECG, the digitizing process, or an arrythmia
which is abnormal and might prevent the inclusion of this subject into a
database of “healthy” subjects.
There are many issues related to pre-analysis editing. Issues related to
reliability must be considered when using manual and automated outlier
correction techniques. The measurement of reliability in the detection and
correction of outliers should be considered an ongoing process. This will
ensure that the decision making and pattern recognition tasks are invariant
both within and between data sets. While the above paragraphs have focused
primarily on when to edit, editing is a process that should be used prudently.
Over-editing is equally injurious to subsequent variability analysis as is
under-editing. It is preferable to correct and prevent artifactual data points
at the level of electrode site selection and preparation. Above all, it is critical
that data points are not deleted within the data set analyzed. If there is a
section that is simply too messy to reconstruct, it is preferable to segment the
data set into two distinct sets of contiguous data for analysis.
5.2. Effects of speech on heart rate patterns
There is some evidence that speaking significantly increases HRV (Mulder,
1988; Mulder & Mulder, 1987; Sloan, Korten & Myers, 1991). During verbal
mental arithmetic, HRV is elevated in comparison with a nonverbal mental
arithmetic condition. Continuous speech is characterized by a decreased
inspiratory period coupled with an increased expiratory period. On the basis
of this breathing pattern alone one can hypothesize that the prolongation of
parasympathetic tone on the heart during expiration will enhance RSA.
Mulder (1988) suggests that this effect is due to a change in respiratory
pattern. Thus, before blanket speech correction methods are employed in the
quantification of heart period variance the full effects of speech on RSA
amplitude must be known. The proportion of time on-task spent in the
production of speech needs to be considered in the determination of whether
it must be accounted for in the measurement of RSA. Unfortunately few
data exist from which to generate guidelines as nearly all of the investigations
have used nearly continuous speech conditions (e.g. Sloan et al., 1991). In our
laboratory, we conducted a demonstration of the effects of three levels of
speech on RSA. The levels consisted of: (1) a no-speech condition whereby
the subject was on-task; (2) a “command” condition whereby the subject was
performing the same task but responded verbally to computer-generated
requests; (3) a “monologue” condition whereby the subject performed the
task but continuously verbalized his actions as they were performed. There
was no difference in RSA amplitude between the no-speech and the command
conditions. In the monologue condition the RSA amplitude was
increased in this subject compared with the no-speech and command conditions.
It appears that there is no simple answer to the question of whether
speech correction is necessary in the measurement of RSA. If the subjects
are in an environment where speech is relatively infrequent (l-5 per minute)
or persists for short durations (i.e. less than 10 s per command), and the
purpose of the RSA monitoring is to determine the global state of the
subject, then no correction is necessary. Respiratory patterns resulting from
verbal participation in a command-driven environment would be indistinct
from normal spontaneous variations in respiratory depth and rate in a
non-speech condition. On the other hand, if the speech is chronic and
persists for long periods, then respiratory patterns are certain to be affected.
Speech correction would not be necessary for a pilot responding to, or
making requests of, an air-traffic controller. In contrast, if the workload was
increased whereby the controller’s speech pattern approached a monologue,
then some form of correction would be warranted.
6. Data analysis
6.1. Heart period or heart rate?
The statistical advantages and disadvantages of the selection of heart rate
versus heart period have been debated in a number of articles (Graham,
1978; Jennings, Stringfellow & Graham, 1974; Khachaturian, Kerr, Kruger &
Schachter, 1972; Thorne, Engel & Holmblad, 1976). Although these arguments
have focused on the distributional characteristics of the two variables,
there are additional issues relevant to the psychophysiologist including differential
physiological interpretations and the statistical relationship between
the two measures.
Statistically, heart rate and heart period reflect monotonic, but not linear,
transformations of each other. This means that once the data are time
sampled as rate or period per unit time, it is not possible to transform
accurately from one variable to the other. Most researchers index heart rate
or heart period data by time and not event (i.e. beat). In most applications of
statistical filters, whether in the time domain filters (e.g. band-pass) or in
frequency domain analyses (e.g. spectral), the data represent sequential
samples taken at equal time intervals of rate or period data.
Although heart rate is the most commonly used cardiac metric, the use of
heart period may be more appealing when attempting to discuss the underlying
physiological mechanisms determining changes in the heart beat rhythm.
For example, an increase in cardiac vagal tone delays the onset of the next
heart beat producing longer heart periods, while a decrease in cardiac vagal
tone decreases the time to the next heart beat producing shorter heart
periods. Alternatively, arguments for rate measures would interpret the same
physiological phenomenon as reflecting a change in the rate generator (i.e.
pacemaker). Thus, the same physiological event characterized by increased
delivery of acetylcholine to the pacemaker via the vagus might be interpreted
as a delay in the period or an change in the rate. However, the rate argument
fails when discussing the discrete components of the cardiac cycle which may
only be described in units of time (e.g. T-P or Q-T intervals). The sum of
the components of the cardiac cycle always equals the heart period. There is
no alternative method of decomposing the heart cycle via the rate metric.
Arguments could also be made that heart period variability could be decomposed
into component variances and covariances of the elements of the
cardiac cycle. Theoretically, this might provide greater precision for the
quantification of constructs such vagal tone by removing non-neural sources
of variance.
In our research we have selected to transform the cardiac rhythm data
into heart period. We justify this decision based upon physiological and
statistical arguments. We interpret the R-R interval as a physiological
process which is modulated by vagal influences. We interpret R-R interval
data as time series which potentially can be statistically decomposed into
component variances and covariances.
6.2. Quantification of heart rate variability
As stated earlier there are two basic approaches to quantification of HRV:
(1) the unrestricted use of descriptive statistics (i.e. range, standard deviation,
variance, etc); and (2) the modelling of the heart rate pattern to extract a
variance component determined by known physiological mechanisms (i.e.
RSA or vagal tone). This section will briefly discuss some of the vulnerabilities
in the descriptive methods and will focus primarily on the modelling
approaches.
The unrestrictive use of descriptive statistics is influenced not only by
physiological processes, but also by sampling interval and duration. With
heart rate, a slow sampling interval will remove much of the variance of the
faster underlying processes and a longer analysis window will increase overall
variance. Thus, measures of range, standard deviation and variance are
greatly influenced by the duration of the analysis epoch. Descriptive statistical
values are not comparable across studies, even under similar experimental
conditions, unless the analysis epoch durations are identical. Other descriptive
statistics based upon successive differencing (e.g. mean squared successive
difference, absolute mean successive difference, etc) have other properties
which function to attenuate the influence of very low frequency components
and to amplify high frequency components. Since successive difference
variables are usually based upon sequential heart beat and not time-sampled
data, these filtering procedures may not represent the same frequency
transfer function across subjects or even within the same subject across
conditions.
Many physiological processes, by their nature, are events which may be
characterized as point processes (i.e. events which can be categorized as
either occurring or not occurring). The beating of the heart may be operationalized
as a point process detected by the occurrence of the R-wave.
Although there are methods for performing spectral analysis on the interval
characteristic of a point process (e.g. Bartlett, 1966), these methods are
limited in their application to cardiovascular parameters. Since most cardiovascular
data are indexed by event (i.e. the beating of the heart), the Bartlett
method precludes the application of time domain filters which require
sampling at equal time intervals. Time domain filters enable detrending and
removing nonstationary influences. Thus, trend and aperiodic influences can
be removed.
Point processes create statistical problems when attempts are made to
sample at equal time intervals (e.g. second-by-second). Time series texts (e.g.
Gottman, 1981) deal virtually exclusively with equal time sampling of continuous
processes. Although this is not a problem for many physiological
processes which are recorded as analog signals (e.g. respiration, EEG and
electrodermal activity), it is a quantitative problem for all cardiovascular
events which are indexed by the beating of the heart. For example, blood
pressure changes are time locked to the beating of the heart.
There are a variety of methods that have been used to generate an
estimate of a point process at equal time intervals, such as interpolation,
weighting and sampling (see also De Boer, Karemaker & Strackee, 198.5;
Mulder, 1988). Each method has its own unique characteristics. An important
requirement is to make the time window short enough to map into the
temporal variability of the process. If the time window is longer than the
heart period, it will smooth the data, removing variance, and will potentially
alias a component of the variance in the spectral decomposition. In the case
of heart period, it is necessary to estimate the heart period at sequential
intervals of approximately one-half the duration of the shortest heart period.
This sampling procedure will preserve the variance of the original heart
period process in the transformed data set. However, one often needs to be
concerned if the time windows are shorter than the heart period; then in the
statistical analyses, the true degrees of freedom will be over estimated.
Time-sampled estimates of heart rate or heart period are amenable to
time-domain detrending and filtering techniques. We employ either weighting
(see Cheung and Porges, 1977) or sampling (i.e. probing the heart period
progress) methods to provide an instantaneous estimate. These methods
provide an estimate which is not offset by a time delay (e.g. tachometer) and
allow time-indexed comparisons with other physiological response systems
and between subjects. There are slight differences in the statistical characteristics
of these two methods. However, as long as only one method is used
within a study, the two methods result in similar effect sizes with analyses of
the means and variances. Other methods, such as that proposed by DeBoer,
Karemaker & Strackee (1985), have many of the same advantages and can be
justified on other statistical grounds.
6.3. Periodic processes
There are three basic statistical problems in the quantification of the
periodic components of the heart rate pattern. First, heart rate data are often
nonstationary. Nonstationarity implies that the expected values of the mean
and variance are not constant throughout the data set. Strictly defined,
stationarity implies that the expected value of even higher order moments of
the time series are not dependent upon time. Nonstationarity can be manifested
in different dimensions. Most frequently it is related to aperiodic
influences. However, even if there are no trends, a time-dependent variation
in the amplitude of a specific periodic component would constitute nonstationarity.
For example, the time series would be nonstationary if the heart
rate data were to reflect only one periodic process and the amplitude of this
process were greater at the end of the data set. In our explanations we will
focus on the removal of the aperiodic trend to foster the measurement of
potential shifts in amplitude as a function of time. All traditional time-series
methods for quantifying periodicities assume that the data are stationary.
When data are nonstationary and aperiodic, these analyses may distort the
values for frequency and amplitude of the periodicity of interest.
Second, heart rate periodicities are not perfect sinusoids. Most of the
methods for describing periodicities assume that the periodic process may be
fitted to a sine or cosine wave. When periodic activity cannot be fitted to a
sine or cosine function, the analyses produce harmonic variances at integer
frequencies of slower activity. This confounds the interpretation of the
analyses when the frequency of interest resides within a band influenced by
harmonic variances.
Third, heart rate data are complex and consist of numerous periodic and
aperiodic components. The researcher must not only be cognizant of the
nonstationary component, but when there is more than one periodic component,
the researcher must also be aware that the nonsinusoidal characteristic
of slow periodic processes may inflate the estimates of the faster periodic
activity.
7. Partitioning and quantification of variance
7.1. Detrending and filtering
In most situations the heart period pattern is composed of rhythmic
activity with representation near the respiratory frequency (i.e. RSA) superimposed
on slower rhythms and a complex baseline trend. Often the baseline
trend accounts for most of the variance of the heart period process. While
the trend line seems to be sensitive to shifts in metabolic activity, the
rhythmic activity tends to be neurally mediated. The physiological interpretation
of these rhythms is not simple and may reflect complex interactive
mediating processes.
It is difficult to estimate accurately the amplitude of a periodic process
when it is superimposed on a complex baseline trend. Most statistical
procedures that have been used to assess amplitude of periodic heart rate
processes such as sinus arrhythmia include procedures to detrend, filter and
describe residual variance. The detrending and filtering procedures produce
a processed signal by removing linear or low-order polynomial trends. The
high-passed signal may then be decomposed through spectral analysis into
constituent frequencies. Although these methods are commonly employed,
most detrending techniques inadequately remove the complex trend and alter
the amplitude of the periodic process being evaluated. These methods,
however, function adequately if the periodic signal of interest is large relative
to the instability of the baseline or the baseline trend has virtually no
variance in the frequency band of the periodic signal.
If the baseline trend is a complex function that cannot be mathematically
described by a linear or a low-order polynomial trend or by a sum of sine
waves slower than the frequencies characteristic of RSA, the spectral composition
of the baseline trend will include faster frequency components. The
higher frequencies associated with the trend will “leak” through the detrending
techniques and be superimposed on the spectral representation of the
amplitude of RSA. Since the amplitudes of the faster frequency components
of the baseline trend are not known a priori and cannot be estimated a
posteriori from the spectrum because they change over time when the
baseline is not constant (i.e. the data are nonstationary), most high-pass
filters do not eliminate all the variance associated with baseline trend. The
traditional high-pass filters cannot discriminate between the high frequency
component of the trend and the frequency of interest associated with RSA.
Further confounding may occur when slower periodic activity is not
sinusoidal and produces variance at integer harmonics. In spectral analysis
procedures this problem is similar that of seasonality. For example, there arc
oscillations in heart rate associated with blood pressure control which occur
at approximately 0.08 Hz. These oscillations are not perfect sine waves and
therefore the spectral decomposition of these waves would result in spectral
densities at integer harmonics. In this example, the first integer harmonic
would occur at 0.16 Hz, which frequently is the frequency associated with
spontaneous breathing. Thus, spectral analyses conducted on heart rate data
which include the 0.08 Hz wave might contribute to an overestimate of the
spectral densities associated with RSA.
7.2. Moving polynomial and nonstationarity
The above points articulate many of the problems in accurately quantifying
the amplitude of periodic heart rate patterns. In some situations it may
be possible to minimize the impact of a complex baseline trend on the
on the assumption that a complex trend may be approximated by a series of
adjacent low-order trends. Although on a local level any complex trend can
be decomposed into a series of low-order polynomials, the method is often
not effective as practised. The problem resides with the duration of data
required for the analyses. Analyses in the frequency domain, independent of
low-order polynomial detrending, require large numbers of data points and
the duration of these time series often includes complex trends. We have
developed an alternative approach which builds on the ability of a series of
local low-order polynomials to fit complex patterns (see Porges, 1985; Bohrer
& Porges, 1982). Our method employs short-duration polynomials which are
stepped through the data set. The moving polynomial procedure smooths the
data set by conforming to the shifting levels of the baseline. When the
smoothed baseline is subtracted from the raw data, the residual time series is
free from the influence of the baseline. Adaptations of this method using
different duration and order polynomials can be used not only to remove the
influence of baseline, but also to remove the influence of slow periodic
processes.
The moving polynomial method works well in most cases, if a set of
guidelines are followed (see Porges & Bohrer, 1990). The method will not be
effective in removing the influence of trend when there is an abrupt level
shift within the time period of the oscillation of interest. For example, a short
latency tachycardia due to an abrupt posture shift will cause a peak acceleration
within 2 or 3 s followed by a return to base level. The moving polynomial
cannot adjust this overestimate of RSA because of frequency-dependent
characteristics of the filter. Other methods such as spectral and peak-totrough
will also result in overestimates under the same conditions.
There will be situations in which the contribution to nonstationarity is not
a level shift, but a shift in the amplitude of the periodicity of interest. The
moving polynomial does not influence this nonstationarity. However, short
analysis durations with the moving polynomial technique will enable the
investigation of these influences. For a more detailed descriptions of problems
and potential solutions in the analysis of periodic processes and the
application of time series analyses to heart rate data see Porges (1986)
Bohrer and Porges (1982) and Porges and Bohrer (1990).
7.3. Peak-to-trough method
One of the most common methods used to quantify the amplitude of
periodic heart rate rhythms is the peak-to-trough or peak-valley method
(Fouad, Tarazi, Ferrario, Fighaly & Alicandri, 1984; Grossman & Svebak,
1987; Hirsch & Bishop, 1981; Katona & Jih, 1975; Schechtman, Kluge &
Harper, 1988). Although this method has been very successful in physiological
studies demonstrating systematic changes in the amplitude and frequency
of RSA due to breathing maneuvers and vagal manipulations, the method
presents quantitative vulnerabilities. The quantitative problems for this
method have been presented in detail elsewhere using simulation modelling
(see Byrne & Porges, in press; Porges & Bohrer, 1990). In this section the
major points raised by these simulations will be presented.
When employing the peak-to-trough method to quantify RSA, the researcher
measures the difference between a maximum and a minimum point
associated with a specific respiratory cycle. Or, the researcher may employ a
trough-to-peak method. In this case the change is evaluated during the
“up-phase” of the cycle rather than during the “down-phase” of the cycle. If
the total variability of the heart period activity were determined by RSA,
measures of either the up-phase or down-phase would provide an extremely
accurate estimate of RSA. However, RSA is usually superimposed on a
complex trend and other periodic processes that are not perfect sine waves
(e.g. blood pressure feedback on heart rate).
There are three quantitative problems associated with the peak-to-trough
method of describing both average and instantaneous amplitude of RSA.
First, the impact of nonstationarity associated with the complex trends will
stretch and compress the peak-to-trough method, amplifying and attenuating
the estimate when the amplitude of the underlying process is not changing.
Second, the impact of slow periodic processes that are not perfect sine waves
will result in different durations in which the peak-to-trough estimate will be
stretched and compressed. Thus, the trend and slower periodic processes
would contribute variance to the peak-to-trough estimate even if the underlying
RSA signal were constant. Third, some methods of peak-to-trough
quantification assume that a clearly defined peak to trough must be observed
time locked to a clearly measurable respiratory cycle. This implies that RSA
is not quantifiable without measurable mechanical breathing in contradiction
to the numerous observations of RSA during breath holding (e.g. Hirsch &
Bishop, 1981). Moreover, it assumes that the phase relationship between
respiration and heart rate remains constant and disregards the observations
that temporary cessation of respiration may result in a large, but temporary,
phase shift between heart rate and respiration. Simple laboratory demonstrations
reveal that the heart rate acceleration, which normally parallels inhalation,
shifts when the subject inhales and holds breath. During the breath
holding the heart rate will start to decelerate, and when exhalation occurs the
heart rate will start to accelerate. The heart rate oscillations reflect the
brainstem respiratory drive being temporarily dissociated from the feedback
from the stretch receptors in the lungs.
Simulations of the peak-to-trough method of RSA estimation have identified
the filter characteristics of the method (see Byrne & Porges, in press).
The transfer function of the peak-to-trough method, unlike other time
domain filters, cannot be defined using signal frequency alone. Rather, the
accuracy of the peak-to-trough method is determined by the interaction of
the frequency of the signal component and the ratio between the signal and
trend amplitudes. Combinations of these factors result in a distortion of the
amplitude and a shift in phase. Since the respiratory rhythm in heart rate is
superimposed on the complex trend and slower oscillations, low amplitude
RSA may not be detectable with the peak-to-trough method when the slope
of the trend is great relative to the slope of the signal.
The peak-to-trough method, as commonly used, is a pooled estimate
computed over an extended period of data. Thus, like the spectral methods it
does not convey instantaneous shifts. It has been proposed that the peak-totrough
method could provide instantaneous information on a breath-by-breath
basis. Because of the potential influence of trend and the dependence on a
clearly definable respiratory cycle this is an overly optimistic view. Short
epochs (i.e. less than 3-5 min) are more likely to produce the conditions
which may lead to increased measurement error with this method. Variants
of the method which assign a zero score to the RSA when no local
minima/maxima can be located within a prescribed event window are in
apparent contrast with physiological phenomena and may lead to increased
measurement error.
The peak-to-trough method is not inherently a poor technique. It is
accurate when applied to a time series consisting of a single oscillatory
process and the vulnerabilities we describe produce minuscule error when
the RSA is large relative to the underlying trend. Moreover, data exist which
demonstrate that it correlates well with other signal processing techniques for
data of 5 min duration (Grossman, van Beek & Wientjes, 1990). However,
high correlations among various methods of measuring HRV do not confirm
that the estimates behave the same. For example, in our research we
investigated the influence of sleep state on measures of HRV in healthy
full-term neonates. The amplitude of RSA derived from the moving polynomial
filter (i.e. vagal tone index) was highly correlated with the standard
deviation of the heart period during quiet sleep (r = 0.88) and active sleep
(r = 0.78). However, the measures behaved differently across the sleep states.
During active sleep the overall heart period variability was higher than
during quiet sleep. In contrast, the amplitude of RSA derived from the
moving polynomial filter reflected the hypothesized increase in parasympathetic
tone associated with quiet sleep relative to active sleep.
The useful range of applications for the peak-to-trough method of RSA
estimation can be extended if data are appropriately filtered prior to its
application (see Porges & Bohrer, 1990). When the complex trends and
slower periodic activity are removed, the method will provide an extremely
accurate estimate of average or even instantaneous amplitude of the periodic
process. This greatly increases its utility in those applications which emphasize
RSA measurement during transitional states. Similar to the spectral
technology described below, the problem with the peak-to-trough method is
not with the method, but with the inappropriate application of the method to
complex time series.
8. Time series methods of heart rate quantification
8. I. Spectral methods
Applications of spectral methods consist of a number of operations. Heart
rate data are not merely processed with a Fourier transform, rather the data
need to be transformed and filtered prior to analysis.
First, it is necessary to time sample the data at equal time intervals. To
preclude aliasing, the interval selected is dependent upon the frequency of
the normally occurring process. For example, with heart period, it is necessary
to structure a time interval shorter than the naturally occurring heart
periods. As described in a previous section, this preserves the variance of the
heart period process and ensures that components of the variance will not be
aliased on slower frequencies. Note that there are methods to calculate the
spectrum of time series of point processes (i.e. sequences of interval values)
without time sampling, these methods preclude the application of filters and
detrending methods which assume equal interval time sampling. Methods for
analyzing point processes are discussed by Cox and Lewis (1966).
Second, since heart rate data are not stationary it is necessary to remove
trend. Although many psychophysiologists do not remove trend, statisticians
(e.g. Chatfield, 197.5) argue that trend can confound the interpretation of the
spectrum.
Third, since periodic influences are never perfect sine waves (except with
simulations), spectral decomposition will always identify sources of variance
at integer harmonics of these periodic influences. In time series texts this is
often referred to as the influence of seasonal variation. Seasonal influences
are certainly periodic, but are seldom fitted by a single sine wave. Thus, the
spectral decomposition of the seasonal influence produces spectral densities
at integer harmonics of the seasonal frequency. In heart rate research this is
seen as the influence of the harmonics from the slow heart rate processes
such as circadian rhythms or the Traube-Hering-Mayer wave (i.e. Mayer
wave sinus arrhythmia) influencing the spectral densities associated with
physiological processes at higher frequencies (e.g. RSA).
The impact of these effects is a function of the ratio of the harmonics to
the amplitude of true signal (i.e. signal-to-noise ratio). In many cases the
effect of harmonics from slower periodic processes will be trivial relative to
the true amplitude of the process being studied. However, harmonics may
play a role in confounding the data with various pathophysiological conditions,
when higher frequency heart rate oscillations (i.e. RSA) are greatly
attenuated relative to the slower activity.
We remove the trend and slow periodic processes (e.g. seasonality) with
the moving polynomial procedure. Information regarding this procedure is
described above. A more detailed explanation of how this method influences
the spectral decomposition of psychophysiological data is described by Porges
and Bohrer (19901. Other researchers have used a variety of model fitting
regression and filter techniques to deal with these problems.
Fourth, the detrended and filtered time series is decomposed into frequency
components with Fourier analysis. There are numerous Fourier
methods. The two most common are the fast Fourier transform (FIT) and
the discrete Fourier transform (DFT). The FFT requires fewer arithmetic
operations with large data sets and, thus, is computationally much faster.
These two methods differ on two other dimensions: (1) the number of data
points; (2) the preferable methods of windowing.
The FFT requires that the data points be in powers of 2. The DFT does
not make have this restriction. Following the spectral analysis decomposition
various manipulations are necessary to produce a consistent estimate of the
spectral density function. The procedures attempt to reduce variance and
bias of the estimators. This is accomplished by smoothing the spectrum with
a spectral window. The spectral window is a weight function expressing the
contribution of the spectral density function at each frequency. The nature of
the DFT and FIT calculations also influence the selection of window
techniques. For example, the Tukey-Hamming or Daniel windows are commonly
used with DFT data. While the Bartlett window is more commonly
used with FFT data.
In concluding, spectral analyses is merely another method of calculating
and partitioning variance. The accuracy of the method in describing the
variance in a specific frequency band is dependent upon the treatment of the
data prior to the frequency domain transformation. Statisticians have been
aware of this issue and have noted that with nonstationary data the final
results depend more on the method chosen to remove trend than on any
other factor (see Chatfield, 1975).
A major issue often neglected by those applying spectral technologies is
the relationship between a statistical and physiological decomposition.
Clearly, the spectral decomposition theorem works and decomposes any time
series into constituent frequencies of measurable amplitudes. However, the
relationship between the definable peaks with associated spectral densities
and the underlying physiological process is not necessarily isomorphic. For
example, psychophysiologists may define physiological processes such as RSA
and Mayer wave sinus arrhythmia (or Traube-Hering-Mayer waves) from
the heart rate spectrum. Often these definitions are stated in terms of a peak
or dominant frequency and the associated spectral densities. If the data are
not appropriately detrended or filtered, the definitions may be inaccurate.
This is clearly evident when slower periodic activity or trend influence the
spectral densities used to define RSA. At times, even with a constant RSA,
the peak and amplitude of the RSA component of the spectrum will shift to
lower frequencies and higher amplitudes. The identified peak no longer
represents the dominant frequency or amplitude of RSA, but rather the peak
represents the sum of harmonic variance from the slower activity and the
true RSA. The statistical definitions from the spectral peaks are further
confounded by the windowing procedure which has smoothed adjacent frequcncy
bands. Examples of these problems and how they may be remedied by
the moving polynomial filter are described by Porges and Bohrer (1990).
8.2. Time domain equivalent of spectral analysis
In time series analysis there is a general axiom that time domain and
frequency domain techniques are equivalent. Although mathematically correct,
certain types of time series seem to fit better with one or the other
method. Thus, there are inherent biases in the selection of method. The
relationship between time domain band-pass filtering and spectral analysis
provides a useful example.
Time domain band-pass filtering is equivalent to the integral of spectral
densities within the defined frequency band of the band-pass. If we were
interested in identifying what frequencies are represented in a time series
without any prior knowledge of the potential frequencies, spectral analysis
would be our choice. Alternatively, if we knew the frequency band in which
the signal of interest existed, we could use a band-pass filter and track the
energy (e.g. amplitude) of the signal in the time domain. Our choice has
other implications for our ability to extract information from the data. The
time domain band-pass filter, although extremely sensitive to rapid changes
in amplitude within the band, precludes the study of slight frequency modulations
within the band or the study of amplitude when the frequency is outside
the band. The spectral method allows precise measurement of frequency
shifts and amplitudes across all frequency bands, yet because of the requirement
of large data sets, precludes the study of rapid shifts in amplitude or
frequency. Compromise methods have been developed. For example, a
number of narrow band-pass filters whose center frequencies are equally
spaced across the entire spectrum can be used to reflect the spectrum in the
time domain. These types of filters are often called comb filters. Equalizers
in audio systems reflect this technique. In psychophysiology, this method has
been used to describe EEG activity in biofeedback systems. Also, a method
of spectral analysis, complex demodulation, has been developed to study the
behavior of a time series within a relatively narrow frequency band.
Another method is to link or cascade a sequence of either time or
frequency domain methods. For example, time domain filters such as the
moving polynomial filter can be used to pre-process the data which will
subsequently be analyzed by spectral analyses. This would enable the detailed
frequency-amplitude description of the passed signal. This method
would also foster the study of the linkage or coherence between two signals
with cross-spectral analysis methods. This method is described by Porges and
Bohrer (1990).
As stated above, we often have knowledge regarding the frequency of a
physiological event or we can reliably identify a priori the band of frequencies
in which a physiological process will occur. RSA is an example of such a
process. RSA may be defined as HRV within a band of frequencies. Since
spontaneous respiration occurs within a known band of frequencies, it is
possible to use band-pass technologies in the quantification of RSA. Bandpass
techniques may be used in either the frequency or the time domain to
quantify RSA. For example, band-pass techniques within the frequency
domain are used when the sum of spectral densities within a band of
frequencies are used to quantity RSA. An equivalent time domain analysis
would be to calculate the variance of the output of a time domain band-pass
filter.
In our research we sequentially use two filters to quantify RSA. In the
time domain we employ the moving polynomial filter and input the output of
this filter to a band-pass filter. The variance of the output of the band-pass
filter is then calculated and the natural log of this value used as a measure of
RSA, our index of vagal tone 04. Mathematically equivalent values may be
generated by applying spectral analysis to the output of the moving polynomial
filter. Thus, we have been able to calculate the vagal tone index with
either the two time domain filters (moving polynomial plus band-pass) or a
time domain filter (moving polynomial) and a frequency domain filter (the
integral of spectral densities across a frequency band). By keeping the
analyses in the time domain we are able to provide estimates of the vagal
tone over relatively short epochs. However, if we use the spectral analysis to
calculate variance across a band of frequencies, we can detail the exact
frequency of the process. If we were interested in minor shifts in the
dominant frequency of RSA we could use the moving polynomial with
complex demodulation.
9. Quantification of respiration
Since respiration is often measured from an analog signal representing
chest circumference changes or continuous ventilatory flow, it is easily
quantified and analyzed with spectral analysis. The analog signal is sampled
at equal time intervals usually between 100 and 500 ms. The critical sampling
interval being determined by the range of actual respiration. In general, to
avoid aliasing, the signal should be sampled at least twice as frequently as the
periodic process being studied (i.e. respiration). The problem of trend and
slower periodic influences is less acute with respiratory data. However,
detrending and filtering may still enhance the signal when there are long
time constants in the respiration amplifiers.
As with heart rate data, the spectral decomposition of respiration distributes
the variance of the respiratory signal into constituent frequency
bands. Moreover, just as there are ambiguities and difficulties in interpreting
the heart rate spectrum, there are problems with the respiration spectrum.
Recall that the dominant frequency or peak of the spectrum indicates which
frequency accounts for the most variance in the time series. The spectral
analysis assumes that the data are stationary and that the periodic process
being quantified reflects a relatively stable amplitude over time. If an
individual takes one very slow deep breath and usually breaths with a rapid
and shallow pattern, it is possible that the spectrum may reflect a larger peak
at the frequency band representing the slow breath than at the frequency
band representing the modal rapid breaths. In this case there may be two
peaks in the spectrum. However, if there are a few slightly deeper and
slightly slower than modal breaths, there would be one peak in the spectrum
and it would reflect a breathing pattern that is slower and deeper than the
normal pattern. Thus, since the spectrum actually represents breathing
frequency weighted by breathing amplitude, it may not be possible to extract
an accurate measure of breathing frequency from the spectrum. Often we
find this discrepancy when we investigate the relationship between the heart
rate and the respiratory spectra. Since the heart rate oscillations are more
likely to be dependent upon respiratory frequency than amplitude, the peaks
of the two spectra are often different. There are alternative methods to deal
with some of these issues. To remove the possible confound from respiratory
depth, the data could be quantified in binary form. Or the analyses could be
placed in the time domain and calculated in terms of cycle periods or
peak-to-trough intervals. To summarize, the quantification of many respiratory
variables from a continuous recording (e.g. chest circumference) suffers
from many of the problems discussed above for heart period. Subtle position
changes in the transducer will produce a trend which will have superimposed
upon it the variability of the’respiratory movements. Moreover, a single deep
breath may corrupt a spectral analysis estimate of the respiratory rate.
Rudimentary techniques for determining respiratory rate are often the most
impervious to these artifacts. One example is through visual inspection of the
data in order to count the respiratory cycles per unit time to determine rate.
The research question will govern the technique being used. lnterbreath
interval variability may be of interest in studies focusing on discrete stimulus-response
pairings and as a result, an averaged measure of rate is not
appropriate. In contrast, determination of a breath-by-breath respiratory rate
is not necessary if the goal of the research is to evaluate state changes over
minutes or hours.
The reader is referred to an excellent discussion of the pulmonary system
which contains flow-charts to aid in the determination of measurement and
quantification strategies (Lorig & Schwartz, 1990). One of the first psychophysiological
measures which was extracted from respiratory movements
was the inspiration/expiration ratio (I/E ratio). Different permutations of
this ratio have been developed including the I ratio which is the inspiratory
duration divided by the total respiratory period. The I ratio is thought to be
more attractive statistically because the values can fall between 0 and 1
(theoretically). This ratio has been shown in some studies to be sensitive to
emotional stress. Characteristically, respiration rate has been considered a
sensitive measure of psychological stress. With more efficient computer
processing techniques, additional variables of interest have been extracted as
potentially useful in the evaluation of stress. For example, respiratory activity
is not a continuous process leading from inspiration to expiration. The
duration of the respiratory pause (i.e. the interval of zero airflow) has been
demonstrated to be quite sensitive to psychological and physical stressors.
This measure has been found to be more sensitive than respiration rate,
inspiratory/expiratory flow and tidal volume.
10. Problems
There are a number of processes which may influence interpretation of
heart rate data. For example, speech may influence the rhythmicity of data. If
verbal responses are time locked, the task itself may generate a rhythmic
heart rate pattern. It is, however, possible to quantify and to measure heart
rate patterns including RSA during speech. Given our system of measurement,
values recorded during speech do not seem to vary greatly from values
during non-speech episodes. However, one should be cautious in interpreting
heart rate patterns during speech because they may reflect mental effort
demands as well as the physiological demands associated with speech.
Movement and physical exertion change cardiovascular activity. Knowledge
of the experimental context as well as the continuous time line of
behavior is helpful in interpreting heart rate parameters. With movement
and physical activity, the major problem is with a degrading of the ECG
signal. Careful preparation of the skin and the use of appropriate electrodes
and amplifiers can reduce electrical artifacts in the ECG generated by
movement or physical activity.
Missing data are critical since most of the analyses we have discussed
require continuous data. If there are missing data, analyses must be conducted
over shorter epochs of continuous data.
11. Recommendations on what to use where
It is clear that a number of procedures need to be followed. First, clean
ECG and valid respiratory parameters need to be recorded. Second, the
behavior of the subject in the experimental condition needs to be monitored.
Third, a decision needs to be made regarding the level of information desired
to be extracted from the data. If global measures of heart rate and HRV are
selected, there may be a loss of information regarding underlying physiological
processes. Our recommendation is to look at two processes in the heart
rate pattern: (1) Mayer wave sinus arrhythmia (i.e. THM wave or 0.1 Hz
wave); and (2) RSA. Fourth, the data have to be corrected for artifact.
Artifact reflected in non-physiological determination of very short or very
long heart periods needs to be corrected to reflect the true physiological
process. If not attended to, the artifact will greatly influence high frequency
aspects of the heart rate pattern. Fifth, the data need to be time sampled.
Sixth, the data need to be detrended and/or filtered to conform to the time
series analyses being conducted. Decisions regarding time domain or frequency
have been discussed above and reflect the researchers’ specific
questions.
In conducting psychophysiological research in the field, the most critical
point is to get clean data. If the data are confounded via electrical interference,
loose electrodes, motor movement, or equipment malfunction, the
information derived from the analyses will be greatly compromised. Since in
many situations it may be difficult to obtain clean measurements of respiration,
it is possible to derive a relatively accurate measure of respiratory
frequency from the periodicity of the RSA. We believe that this periodicity
reflects the brainstem inspiratory drive which is modulated by blood gas
composition and by voluntary breathing.
12. Future directions
The heart rate pattern is rich with information regarding the homeostatic
status of the individual. Data over the past 20 years has clearly demonstrated
that HRV provides information that is unique and important. Moreover, this
information is not conveyed in average heart rate. During the past decade
there has been an abundance of research demonstrating the utility of the
RSA measure and the relationship between RSA and the parasympathetic
nervous system. There is now clear documentation of the importance of
monitoring RSA as an index of vagal tone in flight-related scenarios (e.g.
Dellinger, Taylor& Porges, 1987). We believe that further information will
be obtained through detailed investigation of Mayer wave sinus arrhythmia.
There are a number of important issues that need to be investigated. For
example, the respiratory parameters which impinge on RSA and other heart
period oscillations need to be investigated further. Among the issues which
have yet to be adequately investigated are: (1) the relationship between
respiratory resistance and RSA; (2) the influence of various inhaled gas
combinations (e.g. pure oxygen, nitrogen-oxygen mixes, etc.) on RSA. The
influence of environmental factors and the impact of stress on HRV also
needs to be investigated. Some of these areas include investigating: (1) the
influence of heat stress; (2) the influence of G-forces; (3) the influence of
motion and space sickness. After articulating these physiological relationships
we need to focus on the evaluation of the influence of cognitive
workloads in combination with the above points.
