Is Music Therapy an Effective Intervention for Dementia? A Meta-Analytic Review of Literature
Susan M. Koger, PhD Kathryn Chapin, BS Melissa Brotons, PhD, RMT-BC
Willamette University
A recent qualitative review of literature in the area of music/ music therapy and dementias published since 1985 suggested that music/music therapy is an effective intervention for maintaining and improving active involvement, social, emotional and cognitive skills, and for decreasing behavioral problems of individuals with dementias (Brotons, Koger, & Pickett-Cooper, 1997). The present analysis sought to update and quantify this relationship, and investigate the extent to which methodological variables influenced treatment effectiveness. Twenty-one empirical studies, with a total of 336 subjects suffering from symptoms of dementia, were included in the meta-analysis. Overall, the effect of music/music therapy was found to be highly significant. A homogeneity analysis determined that the effect sizes were not consistent across studies; thus, a series of moderating variable analyses were conducted. We were unable to determine the source of variability between studies by analyzing type of therapeutic intervention (active or passive), music (live or taped), therapist's training (trained music therapist vs. other professional), dependent variable (behavioral, cognitive, or social), or length of treatment. Although the published literature demonstrates that music/music therapy is an effective method overall for treating symptoms of dementia, systematic variation of treatment protocols is necessary to identify the underlying mechanisms and delineate the most effective techniques.
1 All statistical tests were within-subjects unless otherwise noted.
2 A positive effect size reflects an improvement in performance on the assessed measure.
3 7 subjects were included in the study, but only4 were demented patients. We only included data for those 4.
4 The original data were presented as mean number of vocalizations for each of the 3 subjects before, during, and after treatment. We conducted a dependent-groups (test, comparing vocalizations before and after treatment.
5 As described in Methods, multiple relevant statistical analyses were combined using the method of mean result.
6 The original data were presented as the mean (and variance) of agitated behaviors before and during intervention, and return to baseline and re-introduction of therapy (ABAB). Because the two "A" and two "B" conditions were comparable, we chose the second baseline and intervention averages as the variability was greater for the second intervention (13.27) and thus provided a more conservative estimate of treatment effectiveness.
'The original data were presented as the percent decrease of agitated behaviors during and after intervention. We used the average postintervention percent decrease for effect size computation.
'Ten healthy and 10 ADRD subjects served in this study, but separate analyses were reported for the 2 groups. The effect size was calculated using only the ADRD, within-group comparison.
9 Between groups (music participation versus placebo group) (test; 20 subjects per group.
10 we computed an effect size of the mean amount consumed during music (443.67) and no music (409) conditions, using the standard deviation for the soothing music condition (102) as it was the largest variability estimate and thus provided the most conservative estimate of treatment effectiveness. The resulting p value (.2951) was then averaged with the p < .05 for emotional symptom improvement using the method of mean result.
11 The original data were presented as mean amount of time spent during a meal when music was present or absent. We conducted a dependent-groups (test, comparing average time before and after (M = 12.93), versus during, treatment (Af= 15.64).
12 Analyses were reported for three conditions (musically cued reminiscence, verbally cued reminiscence, and musical activity). We restricted our effect size calculation to the musical activity condition as this was most directly relevant to our hypothesis and consistent with our inclusion criteria.
13 For the purposes of moderator variable analyses, therapeutic techniques (IVs) were categorized as active or passive. M Music was presented for 10-20 min per session. We took the median of this range for calculation of the correlation between treatment length and effect size. 15 Although patients were encouraged to sing along, it appeared that the intervention primarily consisted of the therapist singing.
16 Two subjects received 2,10 min sessions for 4 days; 1 subject received 2,10 min sessions for 8 days. We took the mean length for calculation of the correlation between treatment length and effect size.
"NS: Not specified. 18 Music was presented for 30-45 min per session. We took the median of this range for calculation of the correlation between treatment length and effect size. 19 Three conditions were included in the report but we used only the musical activity condition for this analysis. 50 Most of the music was taped, though "simple songs of dedication were used to greet each resident" (p. 48).
21 = Reisberg: Global Deterioration Scale; MMSE: Mini-Mental Status Examination; CDR: Clinical Dementia Rating; MDDA: Multidimensional Dementia Assessment; NS: Not Specified. 22 = RMT: Professional Music Therapist; OTR/L: Occupational Therapist; RN: Registered Nurse; NS: Not Specified. 23 = For the purposes of moderating variable analyses, the dependent variables were categorized
as Behavior Managment (Beh Mgmt), Social/Emotional, and Cognitive. 24 = Patient inclusion was based on the presence of disruptive vocalizations. 25 = Patients scoring the highest (level 3) on the Multidimensional Dementia Assessment
(MMDA) were considered severely demented and included in the study.
26 = Patient inclusion was based on the presence of agitated behaviors.
The effect sizes for the 21 studies, contributing a total of 336 subjects, were combined using the DSTAT software (Johnson, 1989) which incorporates procedures described by Hedges and Olkin
(1985). Briefly, the difference in within-group variability (in standard deviation units) between music and nonmusic conditions from each study was weighted by the reciprocal of its variance. The
weighting procedure favors studies with larger sample sizes. The resulting d statistics from the included studies were then averaged, providing a mean effect size expressed with a 95% confidence interval. As published studies may represent a biased sample wherein only significant results are reported (the so-called "file drawer problem"), we computed the number of studies averaging null results that would bring the acquired overall effect size to just significant at p = .05 (see Rosenthal & Rosnow, 1991, p. 509 for the computational formula).
In order to determine whether effect sizes were consistent across studies, a test of homogeneity was conducted. A statistically significant result reflects effect size differences across studies; study qualities may then be subjected to model testing to explore the source of the variability in results. The moderating variables assessed were:
(a) treatment length in minutes, (b) therapists' training—music therapist versus other professional, (c) therapeutic intervention— active or passive exposure to music, (d) type of music presentation —live or taped music, (e) dependent variable—social/emotional, cognitive, or behavioral measure.
Although the studies were coded for the disease severity of the subjects, this variable was not included in the analysis due to the presence of a range of symptom severity within studies and divergent diagnostic criteria between studies (see Table 1). Thus, reports could not be distinguished on the basis of patient characteristics.
Results
The obtained mean effect size (d) was 0.7879, with a confidence interval (CI) of 0.62 to 0.95. As the CI does not include zero, this indicates a significant effect of music therapy on the amelioration of symptoms of dementia.1 We found that 622 unpublished studies averaging null results would need to exist before concluding that our overall finding could be attributed to sampling bias (for further discussion of the "file drawer problem," see Rosenthal & Rosnow, 1991).
The effect sizes were not consistent across studies, as indicated by the significant value obtained in the homogeneity test, Q (20)=
51.485, p= .0001. Categorical model testing of the study characteristics that we included did not determine the cause of variability between studies. Specifically, homogeneity analyses revealed no significant differences. That is, no effect size inconsistencies were detected when studies were subdivided according to active versus passive treatment, live versus taped music, professional music therapist versus other professional, or type of dependent variable assessed (all ps > .1). See Table 2 for average ds and confidence intervals, rs and respective Rvalues for each level of each moderating variable. The type of dependent variable did not account for effect size.differences between studies whether the analysis was run with all three types (behavioral, social, or cognitive) or with the variables collapsed into two categories (behavior management versus other), as one study included both cognitive and social assessments (Smith-Marchese, 1994). Treatment length was not significantly correlated with study effect size for the 16 reports that specified the amount of treatment (r= -.185; p= .5).
Discussion
Although the overall results of this meta-analysis corroborate Brotons et al.'s (1997) suggestion that music/music therapy is an effective intervention when dealing with patients with dementia, we were unable to determine the relative efficacy of different methodological protocols within the existing literature. The symptoms that are responsive to treatment with music are apparently diverse.
Specifically, improvement in social behaviors included participation in group singing (Olderog-Millard & Smith, 1989), socializing, and vocalizing (Pollack & Namazi, 1992). Overt behaviors such as wandering (Groene, 1993; Olderog-Millard & Smith, 1989) and restlessness during meals (Ragneskog, Kihlgren, Karlsson, & Norberg, 1996) were demonstrated to decrease in occurrence, although Denney's (1997) reported trend toward improvement did not attain statistical significance in our calculation of an effect size. Several studies reported reductions in agitated behaviors. (Brotons & Pickett-Cooper, 1996; Gerdner & Swanson, 1993; Goddaer & Abraham, 1994; Tabloski, McKinnon-Howe, & Remington, 1995); however, Thomas, Heitman, and Alexander (1997) found significant differences only in aggressive behavior and not other measures of agitated behavior with music during bathing. While overall levels of food consumption were not affected by music played during meals, dessert eating increased and measures of irritability and mood reportedly improved (Ragneskog, Brane, Karlsson, & Kihlgren, 1996). Amelioration of cognitive deficits were observed by way of reality orientation (Smith-Marchese, 1994) and face recognition (Carruth, 1997), although the effect size calculation limited to the four demented patients in Carruth's study failed to reach statistical significance.
It is not clear whether our inability to elucidate the source of effect size inconsistencies among the studies is because we did not include the correct methodological variables or if one of our hypothesized variables is exerting a moderating effect that is not detectable due to insufficient power. With only 21 studies being subjected to categorical model testing, we may be failing to detect an influential factor.
The overall lack of relationship between length of treatment and its effectiveness may be attributable to the relative immediacy of evaluation following exposure to treatment. That is, length of treatment may not matter in the short run, with improvement evident so long as treatment is available. The potential benefits of music therapy are clinically significant, as this treatment may represent a noninvasive mechanism for improving the quality of life for patients and may also have utility for caregivers (see also Hanser & Glair, 1995). Questions regarding treatment implementation and underlying mechanisms remain unanswered.
Suggestions for Future Research
We are hopeful that this review will stimulate empirical studies to systematically address some of the methodological issues currently limiting interpretation of this literature. For example:
1.
Although within-subjects designs provide appropriate control for individual differences, the majority of the studies reviewed do not prevent against Hawthorne effects, also called experimenter expectancy biases (Rosenthal & Rosnow, 1991), as they generally lack "blind" observers or data-coders. There may also be an effect of therapeutic intervention that is not attributable to the use of music therapy, but to the social interaction between the patient and therapist.
2.
Direct, experimental comparisons of potential moderating variables would provide clarification of the most effective approach to administering music therapy, including relative efficacy of active involvement or passive exposure to live versus taped music, the intervening professional's training—music therapy versus nursing, for example, length of treatment, and whether a cognitive, social or behavioral assessment tool is used. It should be noted, however, that measures of different abilities may differ widely in terms of their reliability. Thus, the observation of a change in specific symptoms following an intervention does not necessarily indicate specificity of the effect; it may simply reflect differential measurement sensitivity or reliability.
3.
It remains unclear what underlying mechanisms might account for the apparent universality of symptoms amenable to treatment with music, such that the specific implementation protocol used, or even the musical genre selected as a range of musical styles were included, may not be relevant. Perhaps all humans, regardless of dysfunction or lack thereof are responsive to interactions involving music (e.g., Ragneskog et al., 1996).
4.
It should be noted that we treated "the demented population" as a whole. However, differences in responsiveness to treatment may be observed depending on the severity and cause of the illness. Most of the studies contained in this analysis were conducted on probable Alzheimer's patients manifesting moderate
to severe impairment as assessed by diagnostic tools including the Mini-Mental Status Examination (MMSE), the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) and the Global Deterioration Scale (Reisberg, Ferris, &: DeLeon, 1982). However, several studies lacked diagnostic specification and patient performance varied widely on diagnostic scales within single studies, thus precluding the inclusion of disease severity as a potential moderating variable between studies. While it seems that the overall effectiveness of musical intervention is not restricted to a subpopulation of patients suffering from dementia, future investigations might correlate severity of dementia with responsiveness to treatment.
5. Finally, the literature reviewed assessed symptom manifestation during or immediately following intervention. Long-term follow up is necessary to determine if the effects are lasting. The potential therapeutic implications of such lines of research should not be underestimated.
