Neuroinflammation in frontotemporal
dementia
Fiona Bright 1, Eryn L. Werry2, Carol Dobson- Stone3,4,5, Olivier Piguet3,6,7,
Lars M. Ittner8, Glenda M. Halliday 3,4, John R. Hodges3,4,7, Matthew C. Kiernan3,4,9,
Clement T. Loy10, Michael Kassiou2 and Jillian J. Kril 1*
Abstract | Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) refers to a group of progressive neurodegenerative
disorders with different pathological signatures, genetic variability and complex disease
mechanisms, for which no effective treatments exist. Despite advances in understanding the
underlying pathology of FTD, sensitive and specific fluid biomarkers for this disease are lacking.
As in other types of dementia, mounting evidence suggests that neuroinflammation is involved in
the progression of FTD, including cortical inflammation, microglial activation, astrogliosis and
differential expression of inflammation- related proteins in the periphery. Furthermore, an overlap
between FTD and autoimmune disease has been identified. The most substantial evidence,
however, comes from genetic studies, and several FTD- related genes are also implicated in
neuroinflammation. This Review discusses specific evidence of neuroinflammatory mechanisms
in FTD and describes how advances in our understanding of these mechanisms, in FTD as well
as in other neurodegenerative diseases, might facilitate the development and implementation
of diagnostic tools and disease- modifying treatments for FTD.
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) refers to a group of
initially focal but rapidly progressive neurodegenerative
disorders. These disorders have a spectrum of clinical
manifestations and different pathological signatures,
genetic variability and complex disease mechanisms that
are characterized by marked and progressive behavioural
and/or language disturbances1–3. FTD has a slow and
insidious onset and is typically diagnosed during middle
age. Most affected individuals are aged 45–65 years; in this
age-group, FTD is estimated to affect 10–15 individuals
per 100,000 of the population4–6.
Despite major advances in understanding the pathology
associated with the different subtypes of FTD,
effective treatments are currently lacking. Identification
of relevant biomarkers enabling the accurate in vivo
diagnosis of the underlying pathology also remains a
challenge7. In addition, direct translation of preclinical
findings from animal models to human clinical trials is
an important issue in FTD8,9, as it is in other neurodegenerative
diseases9,10. A growing body of evidence supports
an important role of chronic neuroinflammation
in neurodegenerative diseases. Moreover, as in other
types of dementia, neuroinflammation and immunemediated
mechanisms have been identified as major
contributors to the pathological process of FTD11–14.
Whether neuroinflammation is a primary or secondary
event in the neurodegeneration associated with FTD
and whether it has an overall beneficial or detrimental
effect are hotly debated topics15–17. Competing hypotheses
suggest that immune activation is an early cause,
rather than a late consequence, of neurodegeneration18,
or alternatively that the initial pathological insult (that
is, aggregation and/or accumulation of amyloid- β, tau
or TAR- DNA binding protein 43 (TDP43)) induces
an ongoing cytotoxic response that results in secondary
chronic neuroinflammation and altered neuronal
function in brain regions specific to the disease phenotype17,19,20.
In FTD, immune activation is likely to be
triggered by the accumulation of, or dysregulation
caused by, abnormal conformations of tau or TDP43,
signals released by damaged neurons16 or dysregulation
of the mechanisms for clearing misfolded or damaged
neuronal proteins. Ultimately, these processes lead to
neurodegeneration15,18,21,22. Different immune mechanisms
are likely to be involved, innate as well as adaptive,
depending on the stage of disease and its severity.
Therefore, investigation of neuroinflammatory and
immune- mediated mechanisms is a promising avenue
of research into diagnostic biomarkers, novel treatment
targets and disease- modifying therapies for FTD.
This Review highlights the role of microglial phenotypes,
the neuroinflammatory milieu and age- related
glial changes in the neurodegeneration associated
with FTD. We present evidence for the involvement of
neuroinflammatory mechanisms in the pathogenesis of
FTD, including an altered microglial phenotypic landscape
and the link with autoimmunity, and describe the
relationship between neuroinflammation and specific
genetic mutations in FTD. Finally, we discuss the implications
of this understanding of the neuroinflammatory
mechanisms associated with FTD for facilitating the
future development and implementation of diagnostic
biomarkers and disease- modifying therapies.
Neuroinflammation in neurodegeneration
Although neuroinflammation is considered a pathological
hallmark of neurodegenerative diseases23–25 and
in consequence has been extensively reviewed17,18,23,26,
it is notoriously difficult to define in this setting27.
Neuroinflammation involves a dynamic multistage
physiological response choreographed by reactive innate
immune resident CNS glial cells (predominantly microglia
and astrocytes) (Fig. 1) and accompanied by a complex
cascade of pro- inflammatory factors that modify
the CNS microenvironment. Neuroinflammation is typically
triggered by potentially cell- damaging processes
such as infections, toxins, autoimmunity and alterations
in neuronal activity. The initial CNS protective response
to injury involves the activation of microglial pattern
recognition
receptors, including Toll-like receptors and
their ligands (pathogen- associated molecular patterns
and danger- associated molecular patterns)28,29. This
response is tightly controlled and relatively self- limiting
compared with inflammatory processes occurring in
the periphery,
owing to bidirectional communication
between the CNS and the (central and peripheral)
immune system, which ensures the maintenance of
neural homeostasis22,30,31.
However, uncontrolled or
chronic neuroinflammation
and prolonged activation
of microglial cells result in excessive and dysregulated
production of pro-inflammatory factors, including
C-reactive protein, cytokines and chemokines32,33.
These factors prohibit neuronal repair, resulting in
synaptic impairment, oxidative damage and mitochondrial
dysfunction, which in turn lead to neurodegeneration32,34–
36. Furthermore, chronic neuroinflammation
results in disruption of the blood–brain barrier37,38,
which can itself initiate neurodegenerative mechanisms
(reviewed elsewhere39,40).
Given the absence of effective therapeutic and
curative agents in FTD, targeting pathways such as
neuroinflammation
is a promising research trajectory.
Although immune- mediated mechanisms of neuroinflammation
have been investigated in ageing and in
other neurodegenerative
diseases (including Alzheimer
disease (AD), Parkinson disease and amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS)), they are yet to be fully explored in FTD.
Several lines of evidence implicate these mechanisms
in FTD- related neurodegeneration: increased microglial
activation in frontal and temporal cortices41–43,
astrogliosis44,45 and extensive evidence of abnormal
expression of pro- inflammatory and anti- inflammatory
factors in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), blood and serum
(Table 1); evidence of similarities between FTD and
autoimmunity13,14,46;
and associations between immunerelated
gene variants and susceptibility to FTD11,12. These
links are discussed below.
Key points
• Neuroinflammation is a major contributor to the pathogenic process in
frontotemporal dementia (FTD).
• Exploration of neuroinflammatory pathways, immune- mediated mechanisms and the
use of immunomodulation as a disease- modification strategy are promising research
directions in this setting.
• Growing understanding of the complexity of microglial subpopulations provides an
opportunity to explore the phenotypic landscape of microglia- driven
neuroinflammation in FTD.
• Replication and validation of previous studies in human FTD using appropriate
controls, independent cohorts and quantitative methods is pivotal for the
identification of new treatment targets and drug and biomarker candidates.
• More knowledge is required on the context (cell type, timing of assessment and
disease stage) of FTD- related gene effects on neuroinflammation.
• A combination of clinical biomarker discovery and studies of patients with FTD
carrying mutations that target a specific protein or underlying pathology will be
essential in future investigations.
Microglia
Microglia constitute the major pool of CNS- resident
immune cells and require continuous instructive signalling
to maintain their phenotypes47. As microglia adapt
quickly, heterogeneous populations of microglia inevitably
coexist throughout the CNS. Even under steady
state conditions, regional diversity is evident and, during
disease, infections and ageing, this heterogeneity
is compounded
by the emergence of several distinct functional
phenotypes48,49 (Fig. 1). Some microglial phenotypes
have protective functions such as maintaining homeostasis,
regulating synaptogenesis and refining synapses50.
Other microglial phenotypes have potentially
harmful (pro-inflammatory) functions, and some might
even combine protective and harmful actions (Box 1).
Accordingly, an in-depth understanding of the different
microglial phenotypes in brain regions affected by
neurodegeneration is required before treatments can be
designed that limit any deleterious effects of microglia
in neurodegenerative diseases without impairing their
beneficial functions.
Translocator protein (TSPO) is a marker for inflammatory
glia51,52, and in vivo PET imaging with the
TSPO ligand 11C- PK11195 identified the presence of
inflammatory glia in frontotemporal brain regions of
patients with FTD41. These patients had atrophy predominantly
in the left hemisphere, but 11C- PK11195
signals were found in the frontotemporal regions of
both hemispheres, suggesting that this increase in
inflammatory glia occurs before marked atrophy41. Of
note, upregulated expression of TSPO is often (but not
always53) observed in conjunction with increased levels
of pro- inflammatory cytokines. Debate also continues
about which glial phenotype(s) are identified by TSPO
PET ligands54–56.
Fig. 1 | Neuroinflammation and immune-mediated mechanisms in FTD.
Several lines of evidence indicate an important role for neuroinflammation and
immune- mediated mechanisms in the progression of frontotemporal
dememtia (FTD). a | An altered glial phenotypic landscape, cortical
inflammation, microglial activation and dystrophy and astrogliosis develops in
the frontal and temporal cortices. b | Age- related glial changes result
in upregulation of microglial regulatory genes, increased pro- inflammatory
markers and decreased anti- inflammatory markers. c | HL A loci and immune
system involvement are associated with the development of FTD and with
the increased prevalence of nonthyroid autoimmune disorders in FTD, and
highlight a shared genetic risk between FTD and immune- mediated diseases.
d | Dysregulated expression and infiltration of key pro- inflammatory and antiinflammatory
cytokines and chemokines occurs in the periphery in FTD.
e | FTD- causative mutations have been identified in several genes involved in
neuroinflammation, and might actively drive disease in FTD. f | The clinical and
pathological spectrum of FTD subtypes, including those already identified to
possess a potentially unique immune signature (highlighted in green) and
those yet to be investigated. The current knowledge of neuroinflammatory
mechanisms in FTD, as presented here, provides a basis to facilitate the
development and implementation of diagnostic tools and disease- modifying
treatments in FTD and highlights the need for further understanding of the
underlying associated molecular pathomechanisms. AD, Alzheimer disease;
BBB, blood–brain barrier ; bvFTD, behavioural variant FTD; CSF, cerebrospinal
fluid; C9orf72, chromosome 9 open reading frame 72; FasL, Fas ligand;
FTLD- FUS, frontotemporal lobar degeneration with fused in sarcoma;
FTLD- ni, frontotemporal lobar degeneration with no inclusions; FTLDtau,
frontotemporal lobar degeneration with tau inclusions; FTLD- TDP,
frontotemporal lobar degeneration with TAR- DNA binding protein 43
inclusions; GRN, progranulin; IP-10, interferon- γ-induced protein 10; lvPPA ,
logopenic variant primary progressive aphasia; MAPT, microtubule- associated
protein tau; MCP-1, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1; nfvPPA , nonfluent
variant primary progressive aphasia; PPA , primary progressive aphasia;
RANTES, regulated on activation, normal T cell expressed and secreted; svPPA ,
semantic variant primary progressive aphasia; TBK1, tank binding kinase 1; TNF,
tumour necrosis factor ; TRAILR3, TNF- related apoptosis- inducing ligand
decoy receptor ; TREM2, triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2.
A small number of studies have used immunohistochemistry
studies of FTD brain tissue to identify the
presence of activated microglia in disease- relevant
areas42,45,57–59. In addition, these studies provide evidence
that at least some activated microglia are phagocytic, as
indexed by CD68+ staining, a commonly used marker
of phagocytic microglia. This marker, however, also
identifies macrophages42,45,57–59. Immunohistochemistry
studies revealed a subset of CD68+ cells clustered around
blood vessels in the hippocampus in brain tissue from
a patient with FTD associated with the P301S mutation
of microtubule- associated protein tau (encoded by
MAPT)58. This perivascular location suggests that some
of these CD68+ cells were infiltrating macrophages.
Further studies using cell markers that can distinguish
infiltrating macrophages from microglia, such as transmembrane
protein-119 (refs60,61), are needed to understand
what proportion (if any) of the CD68+ cells in FTD
brain tissue are infiltrating macrophages.
Another immunohistochemical study of brain tissue
from a patient with FTD caused by a mutation in
GRN (which encodes progranulin) suggests that phenotypic
changes in microglia might differ between brain
regions57. As well as CD68 positivity, this study looked
for IBA1 (ionized calcium- binding adapter molecule,
also known as allograft inflammatory factor 1) expression,
which is upregulated on activated microglia. More
CD68+ cells were found in white matter than in grey
matter in most regions, and many more IBA1+ microglia
were found in frontal and temporal white matter
than in grey matter. Adding to this complexity, in the
frontal lobe, amoeboid microglia were predominantly
found in grey matter whereas dystrophic or senescent
microglia were predominantly found in white matter
around hyperintensities. Although this study involved
only one patient, the results suggest that the phenotype
of microglia in FTD differs in white versus grey matter.
Several studies have used ‘omic’ techniques to investigate
whether the subpopulations of microglia associated
with FTD differ from those linked to other neurodegenerative
diseases. A proteomic study of frontal cortex tissue
from patients with FTD identified an RNA- binding
protein- related module that was enriched for microglial
proteins and correlated with TDP43 burden in patients
with FTD and in those with both FTD and ALS62, but not
in patients with AD (in a previous study conducted by
the same researchers). This observation suggests a relationship
between FTD- related microglial phenotypes
and RNA- binding protein dysfunction. Furthermore, a
module enriched for inflammatory proteins was markedly
upregulated in individuals with FTD compared
with patients with ALS or control individuals62. These
proteins were expressed in both microglia and astrocytes
(Fig. 1), suggesting that these two glial subtypes contribute
to neuroinflammation in FTD.
A separate omics study used RNA sequencing to
investigate the transcriptome of single cells bearing the
myeloid marker CD11b obtained from the hippocampus
of Mapt- transgenic mice that express P301S mutant tau,
which is associated with FTD. These cells overexpressed
various neurodegeneration- related genes, many of
which were associated with the plasma membrane and
the extracellular space63. This finding might indicate that
microglia in this tauopathy interact with their surroundings
differently to Mapt wild- type microglia. CD11b+
cells from transgenic mice carrying another FTD-linked
Mapt mutation (encoding P301L mutant tau) also showed
upregulation of the same neurodegeneration-related
genes, but to a lesser extent63.
Although much remains to be learned, the above
studies clearly show that the altered glial function in
FTD is characterized by upregulation of heterogeneous
populations of dystrophic and activated microglia, some
of which express neurodegeneration-related genes and
genes linked to dysfunction of RNA-binding proteins.
However, these studies are also beginning to show that the
phenotypic landscape of microglia in FTD differs from
that in other neurodegenerative diseases, differs between
subtypes of FTD (that is, between FTD with ALS and
FTD alone, and between P301S- tau versus P301L-tau)
and can even differ between white and grey matter from
the same individual.
Autoimmunity
The link between autoimmunity and FTD (Fig. 1) remains
poorly understood and is yet to be fully explored.
However, an extensive evaluation of published data on
immune homeostasis in FTD has expanded the range
of potential therapeutic targets in autoimmune- related
neurodegeneration46.
The types of inflammatory immune responses involved
in autoimmune disorders differ from those involved
in neurodegenerative diseases; autoimmune disorders
generally involve adaptive immunity, whereas neurodegenerative
diseases primarily involve innate immunity.
Although it is important to distinguish between these
two types of autoimmunity, questions have arisen as
to whether autoimmune disorders and neurodegenerative
diseases differ in both aetiology and pathology,
or have similar pathology (and progression) despite
their differing aetiology64. Autoimmune and neurodegenerative
disorders might even belong to the same
disease spectrum, given their considerable overlap65.
Indeed, a report from 2018 showed for the first time
that biomarkers of neurodegeneration originating in
the CNS mirrored the clinical (and probably also the
neuroimmunological) course of patients with autoimmune
encephalitis (AIE) associated with antibodies
to extracellular epitopes66. Moreover, pathological studies
combined with structural MRI and functional PET
neuroimaging have shown that frontal and temporal
cortices are specifically involved in patients with AIE67.
A direct correlation between neurodegeneration and
AIE was observed, with a surprising link between the
presence of anti- IgLON5 antibodies (which are directed
against a neural cell surface adhesion molecule) and
widespread accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau
and TDP43 inclusions in two patients at postmortem
brain examination68.
Table 1 | Fluid biomarkers of inflammation associated with FTD
AD, Alzheimer disease; ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; bvFTD, behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CTL A4, cytotoxic
T lymphocyte antigen 4; DLB, dementia with Lewy bodies; ELISA , enzyme- linked immunosorbent assay ; FasL, Fas ligand; FTD, frontotemporal dementia; FTLD,
frontotemporal lobar degeneration; FTLD- tau, frontotemporal lobar degeneration with tau inclusions; FTLD- TDP, frontotemporal lobar degeneration with TAR- DNA
binding protein 43 inclusions; IP-10, interferon- γ-induced protein 10; MCP-1, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1; MS, mass spectrometry ; PBMC, peripheral blood
mononuclear cell; PD, Parkinson disease; PNFA , progressive nonfluent aphasia; RANTES, regulated on activation normal T cell expressed and secreted; SD, semantic
dementia; SMC, subjective memory complaints; svPPA , semantic variant primary progressive aphasia; TNF, tumour necrosis factor ; TRAILR3, TNF- related
apoptosis-inducing ligand decoy receptor.
Similarly, one patient with early- onset FTD was
found to have autoantibodies to glutamate receptor 3
(GLUR3). Although this patient’s symptoms did not
respond to steroid treatment and their CSF and serum
both remained positive for anti- GLUR3 peptide A and
anti- GLUR3 peptide B antibodies at 3 months follow- up,
the patient had frontotemporal lobar atrophy on MRI
and, therefore, might represent the first reported case of
FTD caused by dysregulation of the immune system69.
This finding was supported by a larger clinical
series by
the same investigators who reported further evidence
of an autoimmune aetiology (that is, increased levels of
anti-GLUR3 antibodies) in 41 of 175 (23.4%) serum
samples from patients with FTD. The same autoantibodies
were detected in the CSF in 15 of the 69 (21.7%)
patients for whom CSF samples were available70.
A report published in 2018 described a patient with
subacute onset of behavioural variant FTD associated
with elevated levels of antibodies targeting P/Q- type and
N- type calcium channels71. This patient had imaging
and neuropsychological results consistent with FTD,
but therapeutic plasma exchange resulted in a rapid
improvement in his FTD symptoms, suggesting that
they had a treatable paraneoplastic antibody cause. The
link with increased autoantibody titres might not be
isolated to a few patients with FTD, as a broad immunological
screen of 100 patients with sporadic FTD found a
much higher frequency of antinuclear autoantibodies in
these patients than in 100 healthy controls (60% versus
13%)72. Although these findings require further investigation
and validation, the presence of autoantibodies in
patients with sporadic FTD seems worthy of investigation.
Further studies are required to determine whether these
autoantibodies contribute to the pathogenesis of FTD in
some patients or are a secondary epiphenomenon due to
neuronal damage.
Parallels between FTD and autoimmune disease
can also be drawn from genetic studies (as discussed in
detail below), including a notable enrichment of FTDassociated
genetic variants in multiple autoimmune
disorders12. Furthermore, serum levels of progranulin
are prominently upregulated in patients with various
autoimmune diseases73–76, as reviewed elsewhere77. This
observation is important given that mutations in GRN
have been identified as a major cause of familial FTD.
Genome- wide analyses conducted by an international
consortium have strongly implicated immune pathways
in the pathogenesis of frontotemporal lobar degeneration
with neuronal inclusions of TDP43 (FTLD- TDP)78.
Indeed, a correlation between autoimmune disease and
TDP43-mediated neurodegeneration was also reported
by another group13. In this study, a greatly increased
risk of autoimmune disorders (especially inflammatory
arthritides, cutaneous disorders and gastrointestinal
conditions) was reported in patients with the semantic
variant of FTD or with FTD and GRN mutations. These
patients also had increased levels of tumour necrosis
factor (TNF), which might represent a unique pattern
of systemic inflammation in these patients. In a second
study by these same investigators, rates of a similar
cluster of nonthyroid autoimmune disorders79 were
higher in patients with FTD — symptomatic carriers of
C9orf72 (chromosome 9 open reading frame 72) repeat
expansions and patients with combined FTD and ALS
(FTD- ALS) — versus non- FTD controls (12% versus 4%)14.
C9orf72 forms a heterodimer with guanine nucleotide
exchange protein SMCR8, and ablation of SMCR8 in
mice leads to splenomegaly and autoimmune phenotypes
similar to those observed in mice with C9orf72
deficiency80. This result might explain the increase in
prevalence of autoimmune disease in patients with
C9orf72 repeat expansions14.
These observations provide further evidence that
specific presentations of autoimmune inflammation are
intrinsically linked to TDP43 pathophysiology in FTD,
as previously suggested79. Not all studies support this
contention, however. A study from Finland published
in 2018 found no specific association of TDP43 pathophysiology
with autoimmune disease81. Instead, the
researchers described an increased prevalence of autoimmune
diseases in patients with FTD without the
C9orf72 expansion compared with their counterparts
who did have the C9orf72 expansion (18.8% versus
10.7%, respectively), which suggested that C9orf72
expansion influences immunological pathways. Despite
these contradictions, the results of these studies collectively
indicate a contribution of autoimmunity to FTD,
with the potential for the use of disease- modifying
immunomodulatory therapies in the future82. Further
research is required to replicate and validate these
findings in large, well- defined cohorts of patients with
pathologically confirmed FTD.
Genetics
The most substantial evidence to date for a role of immunemediated
mechanisms in FTD comes from genetic
studies that have identified FTD- causative mutations or
FTD- associated polymorphisms in genes that are also
implicated in neuroinflammation11,12. In this section we
detail the specific genes involved in neuroinflammation
in FTD and discuss the implications of this evidence for
future treatment targets and disease-modifying therapies
for patients with FTD.
FTD has a considerable genetic component; 35–65%
of patients with familial FTD have genetic abnormalities
in C9orf72, MAPT or GRN83 that cause autosomal
dominant FTD. A small proportion of people with
familial FTD carry mutations in other genes, including
TBK1 (which encodes serine/threonine- protein kinase
TBK1)83–85, although the relatively small number of such
patients means that the penetrance and mode of inheritance
of these variants has not been fully established.
Lastly, variants in FTD susceptibility genes, including
TREM2 (which encodes triggering receptor expressed
on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2))86, do not usually cause
disease, although they increase an individual’s risk of
developing FTD. Several of these genes have also been
implicated in neuroinflammation (Fig. 1; Table 2), which
indicates that neuroinflammation might contribute
directly to the disease process in FTD rather than being
secondary to neurodegeneration. The evidence supporting
a neuroinflammatory role of the products of some of
these genes is outlined below.
Progranulin. Heterozygous mutations in GRN were identified
as a major cause of familial FTD in 2006. Almost all
FTD-associated GRN mutations are predicted to lead to
nonsense-mediated decay of the progranulin transcript,
indicating that GRN haploinsufficiency is the primary
pathogenic mechanism87,88. Of note, homozygous GRN
mutations cause recessive adult-onset neuronal
ceroid
lipofuscinosis, a lysosomal storage disease characterized
by epilepsy, ataxia and cognitive deterioration89,90,
in which neuroinflammation is a prominent feature91.
Progranulin also functions as a neurotrophic factor92–94.
These lysosomal storage and neurotrophic functions
of progranulin might or might not be involved in the
pathogenesis of neuroinflammation in FTD.
Progranulin is secreted by leukocytes95 and, in the
CNS, is significantly upregulated in microglia in diverse
mouse models of neuronal injury96–98. Studies of Grn−/−
mice indicate that progranulin deficiency leads to
excessive accumulation of activated microglia at the site
of injury98. These microglia secrete increased amounts of
pro-inflammatory cytokines and are more neurotoxic
than wild- type microglia99,100. Conversely, mice with
overexpression of Grn show a reduction in microglial
recruitment after nerve injury101. In addition to differences
in the acute immune response to injury, Grn−/−
mice show chronic upregulation of innate immunity and
complement protein expression, which increases with
age102. Deletion of C1qa (which encodes complement
C1q subcomponent subunit A) in Grn−/− mice resulted in
reduced behavioural deficits and neuronal cell loss and
increased survival102. These findings indicate that aberrant
microglial activation or phagocytosis is a primary
driver of neurodegeneration in mice with progranulin
deficiency, at least in this mouse model.
Caution is needed in interpreting the results of
Grn−/− (homozygous knockout) mouse studies, as they
do not match the effects of GRN haploinsufficiency
in patients with GRN mutations. Indeed, a study of
Grn+/− (heterozygous knockout) mice found no gliosis
or neuroinflammation, although they showed similar
deficits in social and emotional function to their Grn−/−
counterparts103. However, some evidence supports dysregulation
of inflammation in patients heterozygous for
GRN mutations, albeit in studies with small sample sizes.
Symptomatic GRN mutation carriers show altered levels
of pro- inflammatory cytokines in serum and CSF104,105,
as well as increased expression of inflammatory genes in
leukocytes106, compared to both presymptomatic GRN
mutation carriers and mutation- negative controls.
The role of progranulin in neuroinflammation is
complex. The full-length protein is processed into
seven granulin peptides, which are themselves bioactive.
Progranulin (formerly called proepithelin) and
its constituent peptides have long been known to have
opposing effects on inflammation in wound repair —
granulin B increases secretion of pro- inflammatory
IL-8, which recruits neutrophils to wound sites,
whereas progranulin blocks the TNF- induced respiratory
burst in neutrophils107. In the CNS, progranulin
acts as a chemoattractant for microglia and promotes
the neuronal secretion of interleukins that induce differentiation
of microglia into an anti- inflammatory
phenotype108. In addition, inflammatory stimuli differentially
regulate progranulin in astrocytes and microglia;
pro- inflammatory cytokines suppress expression of
progranulin in microglia but stimulate its production in
astrocytes109.
Chromosome 9 open reading frame 72. An intronic hexanucleotide
repeat expansion in C9orf72 was identified
in 2011 as the most common genetic cause of FTD and
ALS110,111. Three hypotheses address how this expansion
might cause disease: first, that downregulation of gene
expression leads to haploinsufficiency of C9orf72; second,
that RNA- mediated toxicity results from sequestering
of RNA- binding proteins by sense and antisense
RNA transcripts; and third, that dipeptide- repeat protein
toxicity results from repeat- associated non- AUG codon
translation of these transcripts112.
The function of the C9orf72 protein is not yet known.
However, a potential role of this protein in neuroinflammation
is suggested by studies in C9orf72−/− mice.
Unlike in Caenorhabditis elegans113 and zebrafish114,
C9orf72 deficiency in mice does not lead to neurodegeneration.
However, C9orf72−/− mice showed a systemic
pro- inflammatory state that resulted in severe autoimmune
disease in some strains115–118. These C9orf72−/− mice
also showed mild neuroinflammation characterized by
increased expression of pro- inflammatory IL-6 and
IL-1β in microglia and by upregulation of inflammationrelated
genes in the spinal cord116. Transgenic mice
that expressed just the poly-(Gly–Ala) dipeptide
repeat from C9orf72 showed regional microglial activation
as well as motor deficits in the absence of overt
neuronal loss119. Other transgenic mouse models of
C9orf72 repeat expansion show neurodegeneration
with variable levels of neuroinflammation120–123. Taken
together, these results suggest that the pro- inflammatory
sufficient
to cause neurodegeneration but might exacerbate
neuronal loss in the context of RNA-mediated
(or dipeptide- mediated) toxicity.
Few studies to date have examined neuroinflammation
in human C9orf72 repeat expansion carriers.
Postmortem studies of brain tissue from patients with
ALS found more extensive microglial pathology in
the motor cortex and medulla59 and higher expression
of astrocytic and microglial proteins in the frontal cortex of
C9orf72 expansion carriers than in individuals without
the C9orf72 expansion62.
Serine/threonine- protein kinase TBK1. TBK1 is a ubiquitously
expressed serine/threonine kinase with an
established role in inflammation124. This kinase activates
the transcription factors interferon regulatory factor 3
(IRF3) and IRF7 after infection, leading to increased
expression of antiviral type I and type III interferons125,126.
TBK1 can also activate nuclear factor- κB (NF- κB)
in response to TNF127. In 2015, mutations in TBK1
were identified as a cause of ALS and FTD84,85. Loss- offunction,
missense and in- frame deletion variants
have all been identified in patients with FTD and ALS
(reviewed elsewhere128). TBK1 gene duplications are also
linked to glaucoma129–131 and TBK1 missense mutations
are linked to childhood herpes simplex encephalitis132,
two diseases with a strong neuroinflammatory
component.
In the CNS, a kinase-inactive mutant of TBK1
impairs Toll-like receptor 3-dependent production of
interferons, thereby leading to development of herpes
simplex encephalitis after viral infection132. In addition,
TBK1 regulates T cell activation and migration into the
CNS in a mouse model of neuroinflammation133.
Table 2 | FTD causative and susceptibility gene variants and their influence on immune processes
C9orf72, chromosome 9 open reading frame 72; CSF cerebrospinal fluid; FTD, frontotemporal dementia; IFN, interferon; Ikβ, nuclear factor- κB (NF- κB) inhibitor ;
NA , not applicable; NLRP3, NOD-, LRR- and pyrin domain- containing 3; NR , not reported; TNF, tumour necrosis factor.
TBK1 mutations might influence the pathogenesis of
FTD principally via the involvement of TBK1 in autophagy,
the process that targets pathogens and unwanted
cytosolic components for lysosomal degradation.
Mutations in OPTN (encoding optineurin) and SQSTM1
(encoding sequestosome 1), with both proteins being
autophagy receptors, are established causes of FTD and
ALS134–137. TBK1 promotes autophagy via phosphorylating
optineurin and sequestosome 1, thereby enhancing
their ubiquitin- binding abilities138,139. A TBK1 mutation
resulting in an in- frame 24 amino acid deletion identified
in an extended family affected by FTD- ALS has no
apparent effect on phosphorylation of IRF3 or induction
of IFNβ but severely reduces the interaction of TBK1
with optineurin, which implies that this latter effect is
sufficient to cause disease85.
Triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2. TREM2
is a transmembrane protein that has a secreted extracellular
immunoglobulin-like ectodomain (sTREM2)140
and is expressed exclusively in myeloid cells such
as dendritic cells, macrophages and microglia141.
Extensive literature links TREM2 polymorphisms to
inflammation and neuroinflammation (reviewed elsewhere142,143).
In vivo neuroinflammatory triggers, such as
experimental traumatic brain injury and stroke, lead to
increased expression of TREM2 (refs144–146). Interaction
of TREM2 with its intracellular partner TYRO protein
tyrosine kinase-binding protein (TYROBP) promotes
microglial activation, survival, chemotaxis and
phagocytosis144,147–150.
TREM2 variants have been associated with several
neurodegenerative diseases. Homozygous or compound
heterozygous mutations in TREM2 and TYROBP were
initially identified to cause polycystic lipomembranous
osteodysplasia with sclerosing leukoencephalopathy
(also known as Nasu–Hakola disease)151, which
is characterized by early- onset adult dementia and bone
cysts152. However, although Trem2 loss is associated
with increased plaque burden in mouse models of AD,
TYROBP mutation- positive patients with Nasu–Hakola
disease do not develop AD pathology153 and the mechanisms
by which TREM2 mutations influence amyloid- β
deposition remain unclear154. Nonsense or missense
mutations in one or both TREM2 alleles have been
identified in several families with FTD without bone
involvement155–157. Meta- analyses of gene- association
studies in patients with sporadic disease indicate that the
rs75932628 variant of TREM2 (which contains a R47H
amino acid substitution) confers approximately 2.7-fold
and 2.4-fold increases in the risk of developing AD and
FTD, respectively86,158.
The role of TREM2 in neuroinflammation is complex.
Both pro- inflammatory and anti- inflammatory
effects of TREM2 and its missense variants have been
observed, depending on cell type, context, and the
strength and duration of the inflammatory stimuli142.
Lentiviral knockdown of Trem2 in the microglia of
juvenile
transgenic mice bearing the P301S variant
of Mapt led to the increased production of inflammatory
cytokines and increased cognitive deficits159, whereas
global knockout of Trem2 in the same mouse model
resulted in considerable reductions in brain atrophy,
inflammatory cytokine levels, microgliosis and astrogliosis160.
Similarly, global knock- in of a Trem2 missense
mutation resulting in a T66M amino acid substitution,
which can lead to FTD- like syndromes, led to hyporesponsive
microglia, reduced phagocytosis and slowed
resolution of neuroinflammation after intraperitoneal
injection of lipopolysaccharide161.
Large- scale genetic studies. Further genetic evidence
of a link between FTD and neuroinflammation is provided
by genome- wide association studies (GWAS).
In 2014, a GWAS identified an association between the
HLA locus and FTD11, which suggested that immune
system processes are involved in the development
of FTD. Summary data from this and other GWAS
revealed a considerable enrichment of FTD- associated
genetic variants in rheumatoid arthritis, ulcerative colitis,
type I diabetes and coeliac disease, suggestive of a
genetic overlap between FTD and these autoimmune
diseases12. This genetic overlap included several independent
associations within the HLA region, as well as
single- nucleotide polymorphisms near MAPT and five
novel loci. The HLA genes showed increased expression
in microglia and markedly higher expression in
FTD brain tissue than in tissue from healthy control
individuals;
the highest expression was seen in GRN
mutation carriers12. In the largest cohort of unrelated
patients with FTLD-TDP assembled to date, genomewide
analyses identified novel risk loci that strongly
implicated immune pathways in the pathogenesis of
FTLD- TDP78. Taken together, these studies suggest a
critical role for microglia- associated and inflammationassociated
genes in the mechanisms that drive FTD
progression.
Inflammation- related biomarkers
Many potential imaging and fluid biomarkers for FTD
have been proposed35,162,163. Although neuroimaging
studies have shown great potential164, the relatively high
cost of these studies means that identification of fluid
biomarkers is often preferable. Here, we focus specifically
on potential immune- related and inflammation- related
fluid biomarkers for FTD.
Gene- specific biomarkers
Measurement of serum progranulin levels shows high
specificity and sensitivity for distinguishing patients
with FTD associated with GRN mutations from
those with other FTD subtypes and cognitively normal
control individuals165–168. Furthermore, CSF progranulin
levels might distinguish between FTD subtypes as
lower levels are found in patients with semantic variant
primary progressive aphasia (PPA) and patients with
behavioural variant FTD than in those with nonfluent
variant PPA169. Strategies that increase progranulin levels
have also been investigated as a treatment for FTD
(reviewed elsewhere170). Current approaches include
increasing GRN expression171,172, inhibiting progranulin
endocytosis173 and administration of a synthetic multigranulin
peptide with high anti- inflammatory activity174.
However, these approaches might only benefit patients
with FTD and GRN haploinsufficiency.
CSF levels of soluble TREM2 have been suggested as
a marker of microglial activation in patients with FTD,
although more studies are necessary to explore why
decreased CSF levels of sTREM2 are positively correlated
with CSF total tau levels175, particularly as sTREM2
levels are also influenced by age and disease duration175.
In one study, CSF levels of sTREM2 did not differ between
patients with FTD and cognitively normal controls, or
between clinical FTD subgroups, although GRN mutation
carriers had higher CSF concentrations of sTREM2
than did MAPT mutation or C9orf72 expansion carriers
and controls57. The investigators suggested that sTREM2
was a feasible biomarker of disease severity in longitudinal
studies of patients with FTD175. Further investigation
and validation of these findings in large cohorts
of patients with pathologically confirmed disease is
required, given the small number of individuals studied
to date. Studies of presymptomatic individuals at risk of
developing familial FTD would determine whether CSF
levels of sTREM2 increase before symptom onset or only
with disease progression.
Potential disease subtype biomarkers
The growing link between the systemic immune
environment and brain function, as well as mounting
evidence that inflammatory markers are dysregulated
in patients with FTD, suggests that the composition of
inflammatory markers in blood and CSF is related to
brain health. Fluid biomarkers for regional and cellular
pathology are being developed, and inflammatory
and immune profiles are being investigated as potential
therapeutic targets in FTD. Indeed, multiple studies have
reported changes in inflammatory markers in blood,
serum and CSF in FTD subtypes (Table 1), which suggests
that altered inflammatory factors have an important
role in the pathogenesis of FTD. These biomarkers
include some of the most important pro- inflammatory
and anti- inflammatory cytokines, chemokines and
secondary messengers that coordinate the immune
response through regulation of innate immune cells and
adaptive immunocytes in the periphery30,176.
Although many of these inflammatory markers are
not specific to FTD (altered expression of these same
markers is also found in other neurodegenerative
diseases such as AD), they could provide further evidence
of an inflammatory component to FTD and have
the potential to inform biomarker discovery among
FTD subtypes. For example, levels of multiple CSF
analytes differ between FTLD- tau and FTLD- TDP,
including Fas (also known as TNF receptor superfamily
member 6) ligand and the pro- inflammatory chemokines
IL-23 and IL-17 (ref.177). Increased expression of
the apoptosis- mediating surface antigen Fas in FTLDTDP
suggests that Fas- induced apoptosis is associated
with TDP43 deposition. The IL-23 pathway drives differentiation
of naive T cells into IL-17-releasing type 17
helper T cells. Levels of both cytokines were altered
in patients with FTD compared with healthy controls,
and IL-23 and IL-17 levels were lower in FTLD- TDP
than in FTLD- tau, further distinguishing these two
subtypes. The researchers suggested that patients
with a clinical diagnosis of TDP43 or tau proteinopathy
could potentially be identified by CSF levels
of these analytes, which are readily measurable177.
In a similar study, the CSF signature of GRN mutation
carriers included increased levels of the chemotactic
cytokine interferon- γ-induced protein 10 (IP-10) and
decreased levels of TNF, IL-15 and CCL5 (also known
as regulated on activation normal T cell expressed and
secreted (RANTES))105. Given that GRN mutations are
associated with TDP43 deposition, the investigators
suggested that this CSF signature could be a useful
biomarker for predicting this type of proteinopathy
in patients with a clinical diagnosis of FTD. However,
the involvement of these candidate biomarkers in the
development and progression of FTD remains to be
determined.
The search for feasible biomarkers of neuroinflammation
in FTD is complicated by the variable profile of
inflammatory factors reported across different biofluids
(such as CSF versus blood) and by the spectrum of FTD
subtypes. This variability could be due to a combination
of factors, including the timing of analysis in relation to
the disease course, differences in preanalytical handling
of samples, variation in the type of experimental assay
used, and the very different numbers of samples analysed
and patients included in these studies (Table 1), which
prevents direct extrapolation from and comparison of
their results. For example, increased levels of TNF were
reported in the CSF of 19 patients with FTD compared
to levels in healthy controls. However, the patients’ CSF
TNF levels did not correlate with their serum TNF levels,
which suggests that increased TNF in the CSF of patients
with FTD reflects increased intrathecal immunoreactivity178
that is either rapidly disseminated in the blood or is
only evident in blood at late disease stages. In other similar
studies, increased plasma TNF levels were detected
in 129 patients with semantic variant PPA13, perhaps
because these individuals are often assessed at advanced
stages of the disease. By contrast, a reduction in CSF levels
of TNF was observed in 10 GRN mutation carriers105,
potentially due to loss of the pro- inflammatory effects
of granulin peptides. A further example is provided by a
report of substantially increased serum levels of IL-6 in
14 GRN mutation carriers104, which was contradicted by
an overall increase in plasma levels of IL-6, irrespective
of the clinical and genetic disease subtype, in a cohort of
230 patients with FTD179. The timing of the assessment
in relation to the course of disease was again likely to be
important in this study.
These paradoxical findings demonstrate the complex
evolution of neuroinflammatory mechanisms over
the course of neurodegenerative diseases like FTD and
highlight the need not only to further understand the
dynamics of the biochemical cascades involved, but also
for further replication and validation of findings in large,
independent cohorts of patients with well- characterized
genetic and mutational status and pathological confirmation.
A harmonized approach to biomarker discovery,
with consistency in biomarker collection, experimental
methodology and analysis, is necessary to determine the
existence and extent of specific inflammatory profiles
at different disease stages of the clinical FTD subtypes
in the quest for informative peripheral biomarkers of
central inflammation in FTD.
Prevention and treatment
Evidence suggests that the brain undergoes inflammageing
(Fig. 1) — the progressive acquisition of a proinflammatory
environment across the lifespan — and
that advancing age is the primary risk factor for many
sporadic neurodegenerative diseases, including FTD180,181.
Several studies have provided insight into factors that contribute
to inflammageing, which might provide an avenue
to decrease the likelihood of developing these disorders.
Several key immune molecules become dysregulated
with increased ageing of the human brain. The most
prominent changes include reduced expression of antiinflammatory
molecules such as CX3CR1 (refs182,183)
and increased expression of pro-inflammatory molecules,
including cyclooxygenase-2, IL-1α, TNF and
transforming growth factor- β1 (refs184–188). Of importance,
these age-related inflammatory changes are
most marked in the FTD-relevant frontal and temporal
cortices184–188. As we discuss here, high levels of some
pro- inflammatory cytokines are implicated in FTD,
suggesting that this age- related pro- inflammatory environment
might contribute to FTD risk. Understanding
the mechanisms behind inflammageing could provide
an opportunity to prevent or retard the progressive accumulation
of pro-inflammatory molecules in the brain,
thereby reducing the risk of neurodegenerative disease.
Targeting peripheral inflammation
Microglia are responsive to peripheral inflammation
(Fig. 1). Prolonged treatment with low doses of intraperitoneal
lipopolysaccharide induces a pro- inflammatory
microglial environment and a more severe disease
phenotype
in the APP23 mouse model of AD and in
wild- type mice after induction of focal brain ischaemia
(a model of stroke), whereas prolonged high doses result
in an anti- inflammatory microglial environment189.
As microglia maintain their population without contribution
from circulating precursors, and some microglia
can live up to 20 years190,191, they are very sensitive to the
effects of chronic peripheral inflammation192. With this
observation in mind, it is not surprising that the risk
of dementia late in life is increased by a high burden of
peripheral infection throughout the lifespan193 and by
the presence of other sources of chronic low- grade peripheral
inflammation, such as obesity194. Furthermore, it
is even less surprising that traumatic brain injury, a central
source of inflammation, is a direct risk factor for the
development of FTD195,196. Whether the effect of cumulative
inflammation exposure on microglia is causative
or responsive to neuronal dysfunction is unclear.
However, the aforementioned studies suggest that limiting
the lifetime number of stimuli (whether they be
peripheral or central) that induce microglia to enter a
pro- inflammatory state might reduce inflammageing
and help to prevent FTD and other neurodegenerative
conditions.
Targeting microglia
Microglia continue to change phenotype with increasing
age and experience in humans, and are the brain
cell type most extensively linked to ageing197. The genes
expressed in microglia are defined more by age than by
regional identity197. The genes most upregulated with age
in microglia are related to pathways involved in regulation
of the adaptive immune response, natural killer cellmediated
cytotoxicity, cell adhesion and motion197. Key
immune and/or inflammatory genes that are upregulated
in aged microglia include TREM2, CD33 (encoding the
myeloid cell surface antigen CD33), SORL1 (encoding
sortilin- related receptor), INPP5D (encoding phosphatidylinositol
3,4,5-trisphosphate 5-phosphatase 1), C1QA,
C1QB and C1QC (which encode complement C1q proteins)
187,198,199. Polymorphisms in TREM2 are associated
with increased risks of both FTD and AD, whereas
polymorphisms in the other genes are associated with
an increased risk of clinical AD198. Upregulation of
pro- inflammatory molecules in microglia gives rise to
an increasing number of microglia having an activated
state, as evidenced by an increase in enlarged and ameboid
microglia in aged human brains185. Expression of
genes associated with phagocytosis is also increased in
aged human microglia198.
Our current understanding of the role of microglia
in FTD implies that a nuanced approach to the development
of inflammation- targeting treatments will be
necessary. As the functional phenotypes of microglia
in FTD differ from those in other neurodegenerative
diseases, an inflammation- targeting therapy that is successful
in another neurodegenerative disease would not
necessarily show the same success in FTD. Functional
phenotypes of microglia in FTD might also be affected
by variations in FTD- related genes (for example, TREM2
mutations often yield hypoactive microglia, whereas
GRN mutations yield hyperactive microglia), and the
global disease phenotype as well as where the patient’s
symptoms lie on the ALS–FTD spectrum. These observations
suggest that development of a ‘one- size-fits- all’
microglia- targeted therapy for FTD might be difficult.
Microglia- targeting therapies might need to be developed
independently for different clinical and molecular
subtypes, severities, stages and familial versus sporadic
forms of FTD.
On the other hand, dystrophic or senescent microglia
are also a common feature in human brain tissue from
aged donors187 and microglial numbers do not decrease
with advanced age197. Dystrophic, aged microglia display
deramification of processes, spheroid formation and
eventually process fragmentation, which might limit
their ability to survey the brain and remove dangerous
or aggregated molecules and debris200–202. Genes associated
with DNA damage and telomere maintenance
show increased expression in aged human microglia,
which offers a potential basis for their senescence198. In
AD, microglial dystrophy occurs before the spread of
tau pathology or symptom onset202, suggesting that the
accumulation of senescent microglia might promote
the degeneration of other cell types in the brain. In one
study in a mouse model of tauopathy, clearance of senescent
microglia and astrocytes was sufficient to prevent
cognitive decline, tau pathology and neuronal degeneration203.
Collectively, the results of these studies suggest
that age-related microglial dysfunction contributes to the
age-related component of increased dementia risk202.
With all this in mind, a senolytic drug has shown
promise in preclinical studies in an FTD- like model.
These drugs selectively induce the death of senescent
cells, which are characterized partly by a secretory
phenotype
that includes high levels of pro- inflammatory
cytokine secretion204. Senescent astrocytes and microglia
accumulate in P301S Mapt mice. Use of the senolytic
drug navitoclax to clear these cells was successful
in decreasing tau phosphorylation and aggregation in
this model203. Genetic ablation of the senolytic cells
was also sufficient to prevent gliosis, tau pathology,
neuronal degeneration and cognitive loss203. This exciting
work suggests that senolytics show promise as a
neuroinflammation- modulating treatment, at least for
some forms of FTD.
Targeting astrocytes
Microglia might not be the only glial population that
contributes to inflammageing, as astrocytes also release
cytokines in the CNS (although the genes most upregulated
with age in astrocytes are related to cell morphogenesis
and cell–cell adhesion pathways, rather than
those associated with immune or inflammatory regulation)
197. However, the number of activated astrocytes in
healthy human substantia nigra, hippocampus, temporal
lobe and frontal lobe increases with age (particularly
after 65 years), as evidenced by increased expression of
GFAP (encoding glial fibrillary acidic protein) and the
transformation of astrocyte processes from long and
slender in young adult brains to small and stubby in
aged brains205–207. The functional consequences of these
changes in the ageing human brain are not known; however,
animal studies of aged brains reveal that activated
astrocytes show higher basal expression of TNF, IL-1β
and IL-6 than do microglia208. Importantly, the astrocytederived
factors colony- stimulating factor 1, IL-34,
transforming growth factor- β and cholesterol prevent
microglial death47. Studies of the interactions between
astrocytes and microglia in the aged human brain are
necessary to provide insight into the contribution of
astrocytes to age- related neuroinflammation.
A picture is emerging of an intricate interplay
between microglial, astrocytic and neuronal dysfunction
in FTD. For example, selective inactivation of the proinflammatory
mediator NF- κB in microglia of Grn−/−
mice can reverse the increased self- grooming behaviours
seen in these mice, which are a model of obsessivecompulsive
disorder in FTD209. Moreover, use of a viral
vector to deliver progranulin selectively to neurons in
Grn−/− mice is sufficient to reduce the microgliosis and
lipofuscinosis typically seen in these animals, which
suggests that abnormal neuronal or downstream cell
functioning might drive the microglial activation and
neuropathology observed in progranulin- related FTD210.
In a different model of FTD, P301S Mapt transgenic
mice, high levels of reactive oxygen species (which are
seen in pro- inflammatory environments) lead to excessive
cell surface expression of phosphatidylserine in
neurons. In response, contacting neurons secrete lactadherin
(also known as milk fat globule- EGF factor 8)
and nitric oxide, which drive microglia to excessively
phagocytose live neurons, resulting in synaptic dysfunction211.
Further unravelling of the degree to which
glial- related neuroinflammation is causative of neurodegeneration
in FTD, as opposed to simply exacerbating
pre- existing neuronal dysfunction, is necessary for
the rational design of neuroinflammation- targeting
treatments in FTD.
Conclusions and future directions
This Review discusses the extensive evidence that
supports the involvement of neuroinflammation and
immune- mediated mechanisms in the pathogenesis of
FTD. However, a clear need remains for further understanding
of the molecular mechanisms underlying FTD.
This information will be critical to the development of
a unified platform for accurate clinical diagnosis and
therapeutic intervention across FTD subtypes during life.
In the absence of disease- modifying treatments
for FTD, the investigation of neuroinflammation and
immune- mediated mechanisms implicated in this disorder
is a promising research trajectory. Replication and
validation of the results of previous studies in patients with
FTD, using independent cohorts and quantitative methods
(such as PET imaging, proteomics and genomics),
is pivotal. The identification of new treatment targets
and drug and biomarker candidates could enable
patients with specific FTD proteinopathies to be identified
on the basis of clinical features such as the degree of
neuroinflammation or by associations with underlying
autoimmune or genetic abnormalities. Accordingly, we
suggest that a combination of clinical biomarker discovery
and studies of groups of patients carrying mutations
that target a specific protein or underlying aspect of FTD
pathology will be essential in future investigations.
Given the changing view of microglial phenotypes
and the possibility that more microglial phenotypes are
yet to be discovered, the characterization of microglial
phenotypes in FTD and the investigation of their roles
throughout the course of FTD require further investigation
involving RNA sequencing and mass flow
cytometry using human FTD tissues. Such studies
might enable the identification and selective targeting
of harmful microglial phenotypes without affecting the
vital roles of other phenotypes.
Furthermore, the exploration of pharmacological
immunomodulatory agents is also important for
approaches that aim to decrease the pro- inflammatory
effects of cytokines by blockade of their receptors,
interference with secondary messenger systems and
inhibition of their biosynthesis. These studies will assist
in identifying novel agents that can restore the normal
function of activated microglial cells by decreasing their
neurotoxic and pro- inflammatory effects. Finally, more
knowledge is required on how the cell type, temporal
course and disease stage context of FTD influence the
effects of disease- related genes on neuroinflammation.
For example, the factors governing processing of
anti- inflammatory progranulin to its constituent proinflammatory
granulin peptides, the relative contributions
of loss- of-function and gain- of-function
manifestations of C9orf72 repeat expansions, and the
opposing pro- inflammatory and anti- inflammatory
roles of TREM2 in different cell types and disease stages
will need to be fully characterized in order to develop
potential therapies for FTD based on modulation of the
expression or activity of these genes.
