Taking patient involvement seriously: a
critical ethical analysis of participatory
approaches in data-intensive medical
research
Katharina Beier1* , Mark Schweda2 and Silke Schicktanz1
Abstract
Background: Data-intensive research in medicine and healthcare such as health-related big data research (HBDR)
implies that data from clinical routine, research and patient-reported data, but also non-medical social or
demographic data, are aggregated and linked in order to optimize biomedical research. In this context, notions of
patient participation and involvement are frequently invoked to legitimize this kind of research and improve its
governance. The aim of this debate paper is to critically examine the specific use and ethical role of participatory
concepts in the context of HBDR and data-intensive research in medicine and healthcare.
Discussion: We introduce basic conceptual distinctions for the understanding of participation by looking at
relevant fields of application in politics, bioethics and medical research. Against this backdrop, we identify three
paradigmatic participatory roles that patients/subjects are assigned within the field of HBDR: participants as
providers of biomaterials and data, participants as administrators of their own research participation and
participants as (co-)principal investigators. We further illustrate these roles by exemplary data-intensive researchinitiatives.
Our analysis of these initiatives and their respective participatory promises reveals specific ethical and
practical shortcomings and challenges. Central problems affecting, amongst others, ethical and methodological
research standards, as well as public trust in research, result from the negligence of essential political-ethical
dimensions of genuine participation.
Conclusions: Based on the conceptual distinctions introduced, we formulate basic criteria for justified appeals to
participatory approaches in HBDR and data-intensive research in medicine and healthcare in order to overcome
these shortcomings. As we suggest, this is not only a matter of conceptual clarity, but a crucial requirement for
maintaining ethical standards and trust in HBDR and related medical research.
Keywords: Patient participation, Empowerment, Participatory health research, Research ethics, Bioethics, Big data

Background
In 2013, the so-called ‘care.data’ scheme was introduced
in the UK. It aimed at collecting the medical information
of all patients treated within the National Health Service
(NHS) in a central database that was open to researchers
and others, unless patients explicitly opted out. This initiative
was promoted as supporting patients’ choices, and
visions of enhanced patient empowerment were invoked
by the media. The Guardian, for example, ran the headline:
“Open access to data can break down barriers and
empower patients” [1]. After its introduction, however,
the care.data scheme was heavily criticized by general
practitioners and citizens. A website set up by the NHS
to learn about citizens’ concerns revealed major criticism
targeted at the lack of transparency, as well as insufficient
prior consultation of and communication with the
public [2]. As a consequence, and after the release of the
Caldicott-report by the National Data Guardian for
Health and Care, care.data was shut down in 2016. The
report called for an intensified dialogue with the public
in order to restore their trust [3].
This example illustrates the current boom of appeals
to 'public engagement' in the context of data-intensive
research in medicine and healthcare [4]. At the same
time, however, it shows how failure to live up to claims
to public engagement can threaten the success of such
research initiatives. In general, the respective kind of research
is often discussed under the label of 'big data'. Although
the concept of ‘big data’ is still vague and
contested [5], it usually refers to large data volumes
characterized by a high velocity, complexity and variety,
whose collection, storage, management and analysis demand
new information technological solutions [6]. In
the medical context, this implies that data from clinical
routine, research and patient-reported data, but also
non-medical, even unstructured, social or demographic
data, are aggregated and linked in order to optimize biomedical
research. This development of health-related big
data research (HBDR) is accompanied by high hopes for
more personalized treatments, as the merging of large
data sets from different sources is expected to facilitate
disease prediction as well as treatment decisions through
the stratification of patients according to specific disease
subgroups. In light of this vision, the potential for fundamentally
improving healthcare is often ascribed to
HBDR [7, 8]. Although a return to small data can be observed
in some contexts [9], many health policy initiatives
still emphasize big data. To understand complex
diseases, as well as multifactorial interactions between
different potentially disease-related variables, large data
volumes must be analysed. This is particularly relevant
for rare diseases or diseases with unknown causes. In
these contexts, data-driven approaches are deemed more
promising than hypothesis-driven research strategies.
Since it is hard to tell which data will be useful in future
research, the generation of large data sets is often seen
as advisable in this context. In Germany, for example,
the federally funded Medical Informatics Initiative aims
to establish an infrastructure for the integration of a
broad range of clinical and research data [10].
In this paper, we choose the umbrella term ‘data-intensive
research’ to cover the variety of approaches to the
digitalized collection and analysis of larger sets of data,
including but not limited to ‘big data’ in particular. The
collection and analysis of such large data sets gives rise
to a variety of ethical, legal and social concerns. In the
European Data Protection Directive, medical data, due
to their sensitivity, form a separate category that requires
stricter regulation. Conceptualizing patient information
and informed consent to ensure data sovereignty is particularly
challenging when data from different sources
are consolidated for future research purposes that
cannot be specified in advance [11]. Although the Directive’s
requirements are less strict for scientific research
regarding the specification of using personal data (recital
33), this does not provide a carte blanche for any research
use of personal data. For example, if medical data
are collected at a large scale, it cannot be taken for
granted that the data subject’s consent automatically
covers all conceivable future research purposes. Moreover,
while the data subject’s consent is seen as dispensable
if the research in question concerns a significant
public interest (recital 156), this may be more difficult to
argue in the case of data-intensive research approaches
that pursue open-ended purposes. While social
stigmatization and discrimination can always result if
medical data fall into wrong hands, the large-scale analysis
of data from different sources increases the amount
of sensitive information, e.g., by facilitating more
fine-grained stratification. Furthermore, regulations on
data protection, e.g., concerning anonymization, aim to
protect individuals against problematic usage of their data.
However, there is increasing awareness that traditional
measures may no longer be sufficient as re-identification
of individuals is getting easier the more data are available
[12]. In this regard, medical research with large data sets
inevitably entails personal data. Thus, data-intensive research
approaches exacerbate the general risk of
re-identification. Moreover, control over data use may no
longer be attainable at the individual level, which raises
not only issues regarding individual rights to data access,
but also regarding participant withdrawal and data erasure
[8, 13]. Since there are numerous ethical issues which cannot
be resolved by ethical or legal experts alone, notions
of patient participation and involvement (PPI)1 are frequently
invoked in order to legitimize data-intensive research
in medicine in general and HBDR in particular and
improve its ethical and legal governance. This also implies
promises of a new role for subjects: being approached as
partners in research, or citizen researchers [14]. However,
the meaning and practical implications of PPI in HBDR
are far from clear. Even beyond this specific field, participation
has been characterized as a vague concept [15].
The plurality of participatory terms used in the context of
biomedical research exemplifies this confusion. Although
there are certainly semantic overlaps between terms such
as ‘patient involvement’, ‘patient engagement’, ‘patient participation’[
4], ‘citizen science’ [16], ‘participant-centric initiatives’
[14], ‘patient-led research’ [17] or ‘participatory
health research’ [18], the role these concepts assign to participants
in research is neither clear nor homogeneous.
From an ethical point of view, claims for participation
show different levels of ambition and sophistication.
Against this backdrop, our paper focuses on the significance
of ‘participation’ in HBDR and similar data-intensive
research in medicine and healthcare. Discussing the whole
range of other ethically relevant issues related to this kind
of research is beyond the scope of the paper and cannot be
realized in a systematic manner within the limited space.
The central objective is to critically analyse the specific use
and ethical role of participatory concepts in data-intensive
research initiatives and discourses in medicine and healthcare.
Admittedly, ‘participation’ has become an important
topic in medical research in general (see below).
Accordingly, many of the points addressed in the subsequent
analyses may not be unique or exclusive to
data-intensive research but also apply to other fields of
medical science. Still, the current boom of participatory
claims in the context of ‘big data’ and ‘digitalization’ in
medicine and healthcare appears significant and hence deserves
closer attention. This is all the more relevant as the
range of involved disciplines is expanding far beyond medicine,
life sciences and public health, by also including medical
informatics, engineering, mathematics, and computer
science. Our analysis of the specific use and ethical role of
participatory concepts proceeds as follows: In the background
section, we first introduce basic conceptual considerations
regarding the normative understanding of
participation. For this purpose, we refer to discussions in
political theory and bioethics and reconstruct how they
have impacted and shaped the meaning of participation in
medical research. In doing so, we identify three paradigmatic
types of practical conditions that constitute and define
participation: (a) consent to individual provision of
data or biomaterial, (b) consultation regarding research and
health policy aims and (c) cooperation in decision-making
processes or even involvment of participants as
co-researchers. In the analysis and discussion section, we
then consider exemplary research initiatives for each of
these three types and critically analyse specific ethical and
practical challenges that arise from the accompanying participatory
claims. In the outlook section, we finally formulate
five ethical recommendations for increasing the ethical
legitimacy, trustworthiness and feasibility of participatory
promises in the context of HBDR and similar
data-intensive research in medicine and healthcare.
History and theoretical framework of participation
The term 'participation' originally comes from political
discourse but was later adopted by bioethics and medical
research [19]. In the following, we will develop a deeper
understanding of the respective meaning and implications
of participation in these three spheres. This will
serve as a normative matrix for our subsequent analysis
and evaluation of participatory promises in the field of
data-intensive medical research such as HBDR.
Political discourse
Criticisms regarding the effectiveness and legitimacy of
Western representative democracies have fuelled calls
for an intensified and more direct involvement of
citizens in political matters since the 1960s/70s. In this
context, participation was not only invoked as a means
to improve the results of political decision-making, it
was also assigned with the intrinsic value of realizing the
ideal of democratic citizenship [20]. While public or
citizen participation can take on various practical forms,
there is a broad consensus that it needs to involve some
transfer of power [21], so that those who are affected by a
decision have an input into the respective decision-making
process [22]. Underlying this is the original political ideal of
autonomy in the sense of participation in collective
self-government. Thus, political participation is not to be
equated with mere communication strategies (e.g., the state
informs citizens about political strategies or aims), but must
grant citizens some real influence which is often understood
as empowerment [23].
Bioethical discourse
Participatory notions have also been influential in the
field of bioethics. From the early 1970s onwards, bioethics
can be characterized as an academic and political
discourse dealing with ethical and social issues raised by
medicine and the life sciences [24]. Since then, participatory
notions have gained prominence in this field due to
several factors. First, bioethics explicitly framed medical
and biotechnological developments as a matter of general
public concern. In this context, participation was
suggested to complement the perspective of experts
(e.g., doctors or bioethicists on review boards and in politics)
and acknowledge the fact that lay persons are also
capable of ethical reflection. This promoted a participatory
turn in bioethics [25]. Besides this politically oriented
motivation, there are also further ethical reasons
for the inclusion of lay perspectives and lay moralities.
In particular, if bioethical issues are only addressed by
experts, other ethically relevant attitudes, concerns and
conflicts may be neglected. For example, patients suffering
from a disease may already find themselves in a vulnerable/
disadvantaged position that can be exacerbated
by paternalistic attitudes on the part of doctors or researchers.
The involvement of patients can counteract
this tendency by giving them greater control over decisions
and actions affecting their health [26]. In the context
of current empirically informed bioethics, this is
frequently achieved by socio-empirical research exploring
lay persons’ moral views and attitudes regarding ethical
issues. On a political level, there are also
participatory formats such as citizen or consensus conferences,
where a randomly selected set of lay persons,
more or less representative of the diversity of society, develop
ethical recommendations on controversial biotechnological
or biomedical developments [27].
Medical research
Reference to participation is also increasingly made in
the field of medical research itself [28]. This includes a
wide scope ranging from community medicine, health
services and public health studies to biomedical research.
Apart from the involvement of patients in the
development of clinical practice guidelines [29], patients
can also be included in the research process as such. A
precedent of such an inclusion was the promotion of
early AIDS-research by grassroots activists [30]. Participatory
research in medicine has been classified according
to different models [31–33]. Although these models
are of different theoretical origin and conceptual granularity,
three overarching levels of patient participation
can be identified:
a) Consent to research/treatment. While this may
appear as a rather obvious practice, it is important
to note that, from a historical perspective, obtaining
patients’/subjects’ consent has not always been selfevident
[34]. The fact that patients themselves can
decide whether they want to participate in a study
grants them at least some influence on an individual
level.
b) Consultation for setting the research agenda, e.g., by
defining general aims and limits of research [25,
35]. Notably, this can also be realized by the
politically oriented participation of representatives
of patient organizations or of groups of civil society
in ethics boards, councils, or polls.
c) Involvement as co-researchers in definition of aims,
design and implementation of research.2 In
particular, conceptions of participatory research in
health or social sciences are garnering increasing
resonance.3 In this context, lay persons whose life is
affected by the research in question are codetermining
the aims of research and may also act
as co-producers of scientific knowledge by getting
involved in all phases of the research process [36,
37]4.
Overall, appeals to participation in politics, bioethics
and medical research cover a broad spectrum of activities.
In all spheres, participation is linked to the idea of
giving lay persons some power to influence opinion formation
and decision-making where otherwise professionals
(e.g., politicians, doctors, researchers) dominate.
However, significant differences exist regarding the participatory
dimension and degree of influence.
Discussion: participation in data-intensive medical
research
Although appeals to engagement and participation are
frequent in the context of HBDR and other kinds of
data-intensive research in medicine and healthcare, only
few analyses are concerned with their normative foundations
and ethical applications [38]. We therefore want to
analyse the role of participatory claims in pertinent research
initiatives and discourses in more depth. Against
the background of the aforementioned three levels of
participation – consent, consultation and cooperation –
we highlight and discuss the three specific roles for
participants for selected examples: A) participants as
providers of data and biomaterials, B) participants as administrators
of their own research participation, and C)
participants as (co-) principal investigators. The following
aim is to critically discuss the respective strengths
and weaknesses of the underlying participatory roles in
these examples from an ethical point of view.
Individual consent: participants as providers of
biomaterials and data
In order to improve the understanding of diseases and
to develop future therapies, the availability of large data
sets from a broad range of patients and healthy individuals
is an important prerequisite. Increased efforts to enroll
patients in data-intensive research may also come
with new duties for them. For example, in support of a
learning healthcare system, some ethicists argue for an
obligation of patients to participate in activities that are
likely to improve the quality of healthcare. They list activities
such as participation in health registries, in reviews
of de-identified medical records, and interviews
focusing on the experiences and needs of patients [39].
The framing of data provision as an instance of participation
is most frequent in the context of IT-based research
technologies. That patients themselves can collect
health-related data, for example, by using wearables,
sensors or health-apps [40], or by simply filling out a
questionnaire on a tablet computer [41], is often presented
as a form of patient participation, citizen science
and/or empowerment. Apple holds an own business segment
for research that is solicited, amongst others, by
the slogan “Empowering medical researchers, doctors,
and you” [42]. Following this line of reasoning, it has
been shown that the authors of the Asthma Mobile
Health study, which is based on Apple’s ResearchKit,
understand their project as an instance of citizen science,
claiming that it “represents the coming together of
academia and industry to benefit from the ubiquity of
smartphones and harness the power of citizen-science to
modernize the clinical research process” [43]. As another
example, the diabetes network TuAnalyze, which allows
patients not only to track their blood glucose levels, but
also to share these data with researchers, is frequently
referred to as an instance of citizen science [44].
Given that the collection of data has long been the unquestioned
domain of researchers, the extension of data
collection practices to patients themselves carries, at
least superficially, a democratic and empowering potential:
Rather than leaving data collection to the monopoly
of medical professionals, patients themselves acquire this
competence with the help of new technical devices.
However, the use of smartphones or other electronic devices
does not necessarily imply a qualitative difference
for the involvement of patients in research. Rather than
granting them a more active role, it primarily renders recruitment
more convenient and effective for researchers.
In fact, patients’ activity is largely restricted to the completion
of surveys and the entrance of data, often on a
daily basis. 5 In this sense, participatory rhetoric often
simply embellishes a practical and cost-efficient outsourcing
of research work [18].
In such a case, the power of citizen science is not promoted
on a political level, but rather in the sense of
‘statistical power’. This becomes even more striking
since participation often appears synonymous with ‘making
a personal contribution’ to research. For example, although
Weitzman and colleagues discuss TuAnalyze as
an instance of citizen science, they describe it at the
same time as “a model for engaging a distributed population
of observers in research activities through reporting,
sharing and contributing labour and computing
time” [44]. This description is informative as it reflects
the idea that patients are contributing to, but hardly influencing
research.6 This corresponds to what Chung
and Lounsburry define as traditional or compliant research
[30].
From an ethical perspective, however, it is problematic
to gloss over this kind of patient work [18] by using participatory
and emancipatory language. This is not only a
matter of conceptual honesty but also of immediate
practical importance and moral integrity. If recruitment
for research builds on participatory promises that are
not fulfilled or even strategically used to exploit participants’
good will and engagement, this may significantly
impair public trust in science as the case study of data.-
care indicates. Even though large data sets are essential
in this kind of research, participatory language must not
degenerate into a merely strategic tool to enrol research
participants [14]. This way, participation would be
robbed of its far more ambitious ethical implications. In
the light of patients’ usually high willingness to contribute
biomaterials and data to research [45, 46], the use of
participatory notions to motivate enrolment in
data-intensive medical research such as HBDR can be
questioned. Overall, the ethical challenge here is to ensure
valid consent models preventing the use of data or
biomaterial without the knowledge or consent of participants
or even against their explicit will [47]. In certain
research contexts, sound and reliable data protection regimes
and transparent information may actually be more
important to patients than prospects for getting actively
involved in data collection.
Consultation: participants as administrators of their own
research participation
Public consultation and deliberation about the general
aims of research form an integral aspect in different conceptualizations
of participation in medical research. At
first sight, this vision is also present in the context of
HBDR and other kinds of data-intensive research in
medicine and healthcare. Using 'patient-centric initiatives'
as an umbrella term, Kaye and colleagues subsume
a broad range of tools, programs and projects that empower
participants to engage in the research process
using IT. As one of four key functions, they identify dynamic
negotiation which is said to facilitate a continuous
discourse and negotiation between researchers and participants
and allows participants to manage their preferences
about who is authorized to access and use their
data [14].
However, a closer look at current initiatives reveals a
shift of emphasis in the understanding of consultation.
For example, the US-based platform Private Access provides
an online tool for the management of personal
health information. The website states that “Private Access
empowers participants to share data with whomever
they wish”. In practice, this means that participants can
manage, amongst others, their preferences regarding
consent procedures, data access, re-contact, withdrawal
or feedback on an ongoing basis. Based on this information,
“patients can be matched to appropriate clinical trials
through the click of a mouse” [48]. It is striking,
however, that neither consultation nor negotiation about
research as such take place in this context. Eventually,
the ‘click of a mouse’ constitutes an individual, largely
administrative act rather than a mutual, dialogic interaction.
Even though patients can manage the mode and
the extent of their contribution via online tools, this
does not necessarily imply that the relationship and exchange
with researchers becomes closer, nor that they
are given an actual say over the direction of research.
The direct-to-consumer genetic testing company
23andMe provides another illustrative example in this
regard. The company not only offers personalized genetic
information to registered users, but also builds its
own research database. 23andMe raises a broad range of
ethical questions [49], e.g., regarding participants’ informed
and voluntary consent and their awareness of
the use of their data for specific research purposes. In
our context, the company’s participatory rhetoric is of
particular relevance. 23andMe solicits its offer by slogans
like “Becoming part of something bigger: Our genetic
research gives everyday people the opportunity to
make a difference by participating in a new kind of
research — online, from anywhere” [50]. Participants
who provide their saliva and related data are approached
as individuals who can make – as members of a collective
– an impact on research by allowing their data to be
used. However, this bottom-up approach is thwarted by
the fact that behind the interactive façade of 23andMe, a
commercial interest looms large [33]. According to this
rationale, people’s voice in research is only of interest if
it is profitable. Goldberg points out that on the internet
there is no ‘debating and deliberating’ that is not also
‘buying and selling’ [51]. Although participants in
23andMe are regularly informed about ongoing research
projects, they are still more adequately described as
valuable but largely passive data sources rather than active
participants who are given a voice over the direction
and accomplishment of research.
This raises the question why the terminology of citizen
science, participation or empowerment has become so
influential in online communication tools in this context.
A potential explanation might be the impending
loss of control over the use of data [14, 52]. On this
premise, online platforms – insofar as they allow patients
to maintain control over their data – may be ascribed
an empowering effect. However, it is important to
note that the kind of power that is granted to participants
here is still an impoverished one compared to the
genuine ethical-political understanding of participation
introduced above. In particular, it is an erroneous assumption
to expect that genuine mutual consultation
and deliberation will emerge as a natural by-product of
online-tools. In fact, genuine consultation and deliberation
in research might be better achievable by including,
for example, patient representatives in the
governing bodies of research-initiatives. Currently, this
more indirect mode of participation is hardly an issue in
the respective debates. However, since consultation
about the aims of research at the individual level may
neither be effective nor ethically always required, it
seems worthwhile to harness the potential of representation
for future HBDR and other kinds of data-intensive
research in medicine and healthcare.
Co-operation: participants as (co-) principal investigators
The inclusion of patients and subjects as
co-decision-makers and co-researchers can be seen as
the most straightforward realization of citizen science.
From the perspective of the proponents of participatory
health research, only the involvement of lay participants
throughout all phases of the research process can legitimately
be classified as participation [36]. However, if we
apply this condition to the field of data-intensive research
in medicine and healthcare, only a small segment
of current initiatives can be rightfully assessed as actually
being participatory.
The US-based private company Patients.Like.Me
(PLM), for example, does not only ask for patients’ data,
but allows them to compile own research cohorts. A
much-cited example of this form of engagement is the
so-called Lithium study. In reaction to a study that suggested
a decelerating effect of Lithium on the progression
of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) based on a
cohort of 28 patients, a cohort of 348 ALS patients who
organized themselves via PLM decided to take Lithium
and was able to rebut the result [53].
From an ethical perspective, this example appears
closest to what was described as empowering
co-investigation [31]. Here, the original political-ethical
spirit of participation is retained: the transfer of power.
An even more far-reaching, though rarely practiced approach
to establishing a power balance between researchers
and patients would also require equal access
to funding and relevant sources of knowledge production
(e.g., scientific journals). However, from a
research-ethical and methodological perspective, granting
participants the role of co-decision-makers or
co-researchers does not come without challenges. Most
strikingly, if the use of pharmaceuticals, for example, is
tested in self-initiated trials beyond the safeguards of
traditional research ethics, e.g., ethical review, assurance
of free and informed consent, prior assessment of the
benefits-risk-ratio etc., this can imply serious risks to
participants. Particularly terminally ill patients may be
willing to accept massive risk exposure.
Moreover, the scientific rigor of the results may be
compromised for several reasons. In this context in particular,
sampling biases due to self-selection or convenient
sampling of participants [54], the trustworthiness of
data, as well as the quality of data analysis represent critical
points. Interestingly, even the strictest advocates of
participatory research do not require patients or other
lay people to take on the lead in research, but rather envision
an ongoing cooperation between researchers and
participants throughout the research process [18, 36].
Consequently, if some initiatives in HBDR assign patients
a leading role, this may exceed the ethically desirable
dimension of par-ticipation and co-determination in
the sense of a symmetrical collaborative process. In particular,
in light of the aforementioned challenges, there
is need for adapting the standards of ethical oversight to
the context of participant-led research [17].
An illustrative example of participants’ role as
co-decision-makers is the recent Swiss initiative MIDATA.
Organized as a non-commercial data cooperative,
it provides an innovative IT infrastructure for overcoming
the limitations of individual control over data. In
MIDATA, participants own their data as a collective, collectively
determine the conditions for data use by others
(e.g., researchers) and have a say on how the revenues of
data use by third parties will be reinvested in future research
endeavours [55, 56]. People are thus not only
provided with an exit option from research they do not
agree with; they can also determine the conditions of
data use in a bottom-up approach. As an innovative approach
of involvement, such data cooperatives have been
described as a grand experiment in democratic data
self-governance [57]. It is important to note, however,
that participants of the MIDATA platform are not necessarily
involved in the research process as such. As the
description of a current research project involving patients
after bariatric surgery reveals, the role of patients
is to provide data in the first place. However, in contrast
to Patients.Like.Me, they, as a collective, have the power
to determine the framework of using these data in research
[58].
Even though such data cooperatives can be seen as a
promising way to realize co-decision-making regarding
research, they place high demands on participants. Specifically,
active participation in data cooperatives requires
abilities (social, educational) and resources (e.g.,
time) that may prevent certain groups from participation
and lead to an overrepresentation of others. Therefore,
in order to avoid that the conditions of research will
only be determined by those with the most favourable
social, economic and educational prerequisites, such barriers
would have to be removed [56]. The promotion of
digital health literacy in the broader public may be one
step to achieve this [59].
Conclusions: taking participation seriously - ethical points
to consider in future HBDR and other data-intensive
medical research
While participatory promises are booming in the context
of HBDR and other kinds of data-intensive research in
medicine and healthcare, our analysis reveals specific deviations
from the original normative spirit of participation
that create ethical challenges and practical
problems. In this field of research, transparency about
the use of data is often framed as a participatory practice
in and of itself. Of course, the promotion of an open and
transparent research culture is an important concern
[60, 61]. From a political-ethical perspective, however,
the provision of information only qualifies as a minimum
prerequisite for more far-reaching and substantial
forms of patient participation.
Moreover, we observe a certain tendency to replace
crucial conditions of participation in politics and bioethics,
such as collective deliberation and consultation, with
individual decision-making via online-tools. From an
ethical perspective, this use of online-tools hardly differs
from conventional forms of research participation and
disregards the normative claims of real participatory efforts.
At the same time, albeit much less frequently,
data-intensive research can also evoke overambitious
and ethically problematic participatory notions, for example,
by highlighting research trials led by patients as
innovative science. Both possibilities represent extremes
that need to be avoided. On one hand, participation
should not be reduced to a toothless paper tiger simply
asserting obvious legal standards of consent. On the
other, however, it is also problematic to evoke highly
ambitious participatory promises that are difficult to
keep due to ethical, practical and methodological limits
of citizen science in this research context. Therefore, in
light of the original normative implications of participation,
future usages of the concept should be more
thoughtful and appropriate. Specifically, the following
five points are worth considering and may also be relevant
for participation and PPI in medical research in
general:
First, data-intensive research projects should critically
reflect the underlying motivation for appealing to participatory
notions. In particular, it is necessary to distinguish
between merely instrumental uses, for example in
order to increase the volume of data or acquire financial
gains, and genuinely normative reason for involving patients
in order to adopt research aims to patients’ opinions.
Raising awareness regarding this distinction has
immediate practical implications for the role patients
adopt in this context. Specifically, if participatory notions
are primarily invoked to motivate data donation
and to legitimize research, participants remain largely
passive subjects [38]. Such “token public involvement”
[62] may generate significant mistrust if the public notes
failures in achieving this goal [7]. Moreover, it is important
to critically reflect on the ethical need of patients or
subjects becoming involved as co-researchers. Given the
challenges of data privacy or potential misuse in
data-intensive research, much would be gained if patients
were involved in the governance of such research
initiatives (e.g., as members of a project advisory board,
or regularly invited to workshops).
Secondly, as data-intensive research initiatives build
on the use of data that patients provide not least with
the intent to improve their own health, it is important to
become more transparent about whether patients participate
for their own medical benefit or whether participatory
notions are evoked in the sense of public
engagement that goes beyond individual purposes [63].
Admittedly, HBDR and other kinds of data-intensive research
in medicine and healthcare are increasingly blurring
the boundaries of clinical care and research.
Consequently, it is not only important to avoid therapeutic
misconceptions (a well-known problem in other
research contexts [64]), but also ‘participatory misconceptions’.
Such misconceptions occur if research initiatives
use public engagement rhetoric without actually
empowering patients as genuine partners in research. In
fact, although it may be beneficial to individual patients
to receive information on their individual health status,
it is misleading to frame this in terms of patient involvement
in research.
Therefore, as a third requirement, research initiatives
should resist the tendency to depoliticize the notion of
participation by denying patients real influence on research
– or even exploiting their engagement in order to
outsource research work and save time and money. As
Prainsack argues, “the words that we use to describe
such practices should be sensitive to the power structures
that they are embedded in. We should speak of responsibilities
devolved to patients, invited participation,
and again, of ‘patient work’” [19]. However, while Prainsack
criticizes that participation is often invoked in instances
where people do what public or other collective
actors should be doing [19], in the context of
data-intensive medical research, this is only half the
story. Specifically, there may be nothing wrong with
patient-reported data as such, provided patients receive
sufficient information. Ethical problems may arise, however,
if patients are led to believe (e.g., by sophisticated
online platforms) that they can take their medical destinies
into their own hands, while it is actually others
(researchers, commercial agencies) who are in charge.
Taken to its logical end, this use of participatory rhetoric
may even decrease current research ethical standards, as
it only pretends that individuals hold decisional powers.
A fourth point to consider relates to the availability of
resources necessary for realizing genuine participation.
For example, if patients are expected to participate in
the governance of data-intensive research, research projects
should be prepared to hold sufficient financial and
structural resources to allow patients, lay persons or patient
representatives to effectively communicate and express
their opinions. Moreover, the provision of
resources should be planned accordingly and be balanced
in order to avoid conflicts of interests and compromises
to patients’ credibility. In addition, given that
researchers are usually paid or reimbursed for their
work, an appropriate acknowledgement and even reimbursement
of patients’ contributions as citizen researchers
should be taken into consideration as well.
Ultimately, equal access to funding and relevant
sources of knowledge production would be a necessary
precondition for true power balance and equal
status.
Finally, a general concern that may remain is that even
the most sophisticated participatory approaches have a
certain affirmative tendency, i.e., an inclination to presuppose
and reinforce basic agreement with and support
for new technological developments rather than objection
or rejection. Hence, on a collective level, the public
expression of basic concerns about, or even disagreement
with, such technological developments may only
be possible outside of the respective initiatives. If the
political discourse does not allow for an inclusion of
such sceptical and dissenting voices, this might result in
silent resistance, fundamental opposition or even active
boycott. In order to realize participation in data-intensive
medical research such as HBDR in an authentic, adequate
and coherent way, systematic consideration of its
ethical, legal and social implications, e.g., by the inclusion
of ELSI projects in big data research initiatives,
would be an important step towards making future research
in this field ethically, legally and socially robust.
Take home messages
 References to patient or citizen participation and
involvement in HBDR and other data-intensive research
are often vague, merely rhetorical, or oblivious
to normative implications.
 To ensure the integrity of research, it is necessary to
distinguish between merely strategic uses of
participatory rhetoric, for example, to increase data
volume or financial benefits, and genuinely
normative reasons for involving patients.
 Research initiatives need to be transparent about the
aim, extent and benefits of participation in order to
avoid ‘participatory misconception’ resulting in
misleading expectations of participants regarding
their power.
 Inflationary use of participatory rhetoric can
undermine public trust in data-intensive research
initiatives, especially if participation eventually boils
down to simple forms of consent for or denial of
data collection, access and use.
 Financial resources, as well as education, time and
communicative skills for deliberation should be
considered within research plans and budgets to
enable real cooperation and involvement of patients
or citizens.
Endnotes
1While participation is often primarily used regarding
patients, healthy subjects are of equal importance in
HBDR and data-intensive medical research. Therefore,
speaking of patients in the following includes healthy
subjects and vice versa.
2The role of a co-researcher may involve further differentiations.
In particular, regarding the extent of involvement,
one could distinguish between patients deciding
over the direction of research and patients performing
research tasks themselves.
3Notably, there are external driving forces behind this
development, insofar as current research funding
programs (e.g., the EU commission) increasingly require
the involvement of patients and the public in general.
4This is in line with what Chung and Lounsburry describe
as “empowering co-investigation” [31].
5In addition, the app automatically tracks the user’s location
in order to match his health data with air-quality
reports for the specific region.
6In their analysis of patient-centered initiatives, Kaye
and colleagues also classify TuAnalyze as an instance of
“Citizen Science” [14]. This might be due to the fact that
the network itself has been initiated by a patient. However,
regarding the role of patients who participate in
this network, it seems closer to what they describe as
“matchmaking” between patients and researchers.
Abbreviations
ALS: Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis; ELSI: Ethical, Legal, Social Issues;
HBDR: Health-related Big Data Research; NHS: National Health Service;
PPI: Patient and Public Involvement
Acknowledgements
The authors thankfully acknowledge Nitzan Rimon-Zarfaty’s support in editing
the paper.
Funding
The work results from the HiGHmed project (Heidelberg – Goettingen –
Hannover Medical Informatics) which is funded by German Federal Ministry
of Education and Research (funding code 01ZZ1802B). The funding body
had no influence on the design of the study, the collection, analysis, and
interpretation of data and on writing the manuscript. We acknowledge
support by the the Open Access Publication Funds of the University of
Goettingen.
Availability of data and materials
All data generated and analysed during this study are included in the
published article.
Authors’ contributions
All authors contributed equally to the design and general analysis of the
article. KB and MS conceptualized a first brief thesis paper, KB did the
background research and detail analysis of the different exemplary case
studies. KB and SiS drafted the manuscript; all authors contributed equally to
its revision. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Author details
1Department of Medical Ethics and History of Medicine,
Georg-August-University Göttingen, University Medical Center,
Humboldtallee 36, 37073 Göttingen, Germany. 2Department of Health
Services Research, Carl von Ossietzky University of Oldenburg, School for
Medicine and Health Sciences, Ammerländer Heerstr. 114-118, 26111
Oldenburg, Germany.
Received: 18 September 2018 Accepted: 15 March 2019
