Smart cancer nanomedicine
Roy van der Meel 1,2,3,4,12, Einar Sulheim5,6,7,12, Yang Shi8,12, Fabian Kiessling 8, Willem J. M. Mulder1,2,9
and Twan Lammers8,10,11*
Nanomedicines are extensively employed in cancer therapy. We here propose four strategic directions to improve nanomedicine
translation and exploitation. (1) Patient stratification has become common practice in oncology drug development. Accordingly,
probes and protocols for patient stratification are urgently needed in cancer nanomedicine, to identify individuals suitable for
inclusion in clinical trials. (2) Rational drug selection is crucial for clinical and commercial success. Opportunistic choices based
on drug availability should be replaced by investments in modular (pro)drug and nanocarrier design. (3) Combination therapies
are the mainstay of clinical cancer care. Nanomedicines synergize with pharmacological and physical co-treatments, and should
be increasingly integrated in multimodal combination therapy regimens. (4) Immunotherapy is revolutionizing the treatment
of cancer. Nanomedicines can modulate the behaviour of myeloid and lymphoid cells, thereby empowering anticancer immunity
and immunotherapy efficacy. Alone and especially together, these four directions will fuel and foster the development
of successful cancer nanomedicine therapies.

Nanomedicine holds potential to improve anticancer therapy1.
Traditionally, nanomedicines are used to modulate the biodistribution
and the target site accumulation of systemically
administered chemotherapeutic drugs, thereby improving
the balance between their efficacy and toxicity. In preclinical settings,
nanomedicines typically increase tumour growth inhibition
and prolong survival as compared to non-formulated drugs, but in
clinical practice, patients often only benefit from nanomedicines
because of reduced or altered side effects2.
Despite the recent approval of several nanomedicinal anticancer
drugs, such as Onivyde (liposomal irinotecan) and Vyxeos (liposomal
daunorubicin plus cytarabine), the success rate of clinical translation
remains relatively low. In this context, the striking imbalance
between the ever-increasing number of preclinical studies reporting
the development of ever more complex nanomedicines on the one
hand, and the relatively small number of nanomedicine products
approved for clinical use on the other hand, has become the focus
of intense debate3,4.
Multiple biological, pharmaceutical and translational barriers
contribute to this imbalance5. Biological barriers include tumour
(and metastasis) perfusion, permeability and penetration, as well as
delivery to and into target cells, endo/lysosomal escape, and appropriate
intracellular processing and trafficking. Pharmaceutical barriers
encompass both nanoformulation- and production-associated
aspects. These range from a proper stability in the bloodstream, a
beneficial biodistribution, an acceptable toxicity profile, and rational
mechanisms for drug release, biodegradation and elimination,
to issues related to intellectual property position, cost of goods, cost
of manufacturing, upscaling and batch-to-batch reproducibility. In
terms of clinical translation, the key challenge is to select the right
drug and the right combination regimen, and to apply them in the
right disease indication and the right patient population.
To make sure that we start tackling the right translational challenges,
we must define key strategic directions, to guide nanomedicine
clinical trial design and ensure clear therapeutic benefits
to patients. In this perspective, we conceptualize ‘smart’ cancer
nanomedicine as an umbrella term for rational and realistic
‘Strategies and Materials to Advance and Refine Treatments’. We
propose four directions to boost nanomedicine performance and
exploitation, that is, smart patient stratification, smart drug selection,
smart combination therapies and smart immunomodulation
(Fig. 1).
Patient stratification
Modern oncology drug development extensively employs biomarkers
and companion diagnostics for patient stratification.
Companion diagnostics help to address the high heterogeneity
that is typical of cancer, and they have been instrumental in the
successful clinical translation of molecularly targeted drugs, such
as growth factor receptor-blocking antibodies and tyrosine kinase
inhibitors. As an example, in the trials that led to the approval
of Herceptin (trastuzumab)6, Perjeta (pertuzumab)7 and Kadcyla
(ado-trastuzumab emtansine)8, patients with high human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) expression levels were
pre-selected via pathological stainings and/or fluorescence in situ
hybridization, thereby ensuring enrichment of patients likely to
respond and excluding expected non-responders. In immunooncology,
the first ‘general biomarker’, which is not coupled to a
particular organ/origin of cancer but instead to a specific genomic
signature, has recently been established. This more broadly applicable
biomarker is termed microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H)
or mismatch repair deficient (dMMR), and it is used for patient
stratification in case of treatment with immune checkpoint
inhibiting antibodies9.
Biomarkers in cancer nanomedicine. Remarkably, neither biomarkers
nor companion diagnostics are currently used to tailor
nanomedicine treatments in patients (Fig. 2). Notable exceptions in
this regard are antibody–drug conjugates, which are often excluded
from nanomedicine lists because they are more biotechnological
than nanotechnological (but should be included according to the
generally accepted definition). Four antibody–drug conjugates have
recently received regulatory approval: Kadcyla (ado-trastuzumab
emtansine, anti-HER2); Adcetris (brentuximab vedotin, anti-CD30);
Besponsa (inotuzumab ozogamicin, anti-CD22) and Mylotarg
(gemtuzumab ozogamicin, anti-CD33). In all of these cases, the
intrinsic availability of biomarkers for patient stratification has
played a key role in their successful clinical development.
In the case of more traditional cancer nanomedicines, which
are based on liposomes, polymeric nanoparticles and micelles,
the lack of integrating biomarkers may explain recent failures in
the clinic. Notable examples include BIND-014 (docetaxel-loaded
prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA)-targeted polyethylene
glycol-polylactic acid nanoparticles)10, CRLX101 (campthotecinloaded
polyethylene glycol-cyclodextrin nanoparticles)11 and
NK105 (paclitaxel-loaded polyethylene glycol-polyaspartate-based
micelles)12, which all failed to produce convincing response rates in
unstratified patient cohorts. Retrospectively, one can ask whether
it was realistic to believe that these nanodrugs could achieve significant
response rates in mixed (and heavily pre-treated) patients
not stratified in any way. Relatedly, while the US Food and Drug
Administration-approved nanomedicine formulations Doxil/
Caelyx and Abraxane have generated substantial patient benefit in
thousands of individuals by reducing toxicity and improving quality
of life, their therapeutic potential might not yet be optimally
exploited, as they are applied in non-stratified patient populations13.
To improve the clinical impact of cancer nanomedicines, we should
therefore start to establish biomarkers for patient stratification, and
we should also integrate nanomedicines — ideally already from early
clinical development stages onwards — in combination regimens.
Nanomedicine accumulation in solid tumours is generally based
on the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect. This concept,
however, has come under increasing criticism in recent years.
Some nanomedicine investigators even claim that the EPR effect
exists only in mice, not in humans. Regardless of whether ‘EPR’ is
pathophysiologically the most correct term to describe the phenomena
underlying nanocarrier localization in tumours, passive accumulation
definitely occurs in patients but is highly heterogeneous,
both inter- and intra-individually. To address this, strategies and
materials are needed to monitor and predict nanomedicine accumulation
and efficacy14. In the case of ligand-targeted nanomedicines,
such as BIND-014, which relies on both EPR and active recognition
of receptors overexpressed at pathological sites, patient stratification
can in principle be achieved relatively easily, for example, via immunohistochemically
assessing PSMA expression in tumour biopsies15.
In addition, PSMA-targeted radiotracers, which are becoming
increasingly established in the clinic, can be used to monitor receptor
expression on tumour cells and/or angiogenic endothelium via
positron emission tomography (PET) or single-photon emission
computed tomography (SPECT), allowing for patient stratification
also in metastatic patients16. Another approach is circulating tumour
cell (CTC) analysis, which, when retrospectively applied in a BIND-
014 phase II clinical trial, indicated that efficient treatment coincided
with reduced PSMA-positive CTC10. This strategy warrants
further investigation, as PSMA-positive (and other) CTC can potentially
be employed both as a biomarker for patient stratification and
as an indicator of therapeutic responses.
In this context, it is important to keep the basic principles of active
tumour targeting in mind. Active targeting relies to a significant
extent on passive targeting, which requires prolonged circulation
times. Introducing targeting ligands often promotes nanomedicine
clearance from the blood stream, via opsonization and accelerated
uptake by the mononuclear phagocytic system (MPS)17. Before they
can bind to target cells, actively targeted nanomedicines furthermore
have to extravasate out of the blood vessels in tumours and metastases,
penetrate deep into the interstitium and cross multiple cell layers.
The latter can suffer from the so called binding-site barrier18, which
may hinder nanomedicine penetration19. Nanocarrier size plays a
crucial role in determining the added value of active targeting. It has
for instance been shown that small-sized (~7 nm) polymeric nanocarriers
achieve much higher levels of tumour accumulation if they
are actively targeted, because of improved retention20. Conversely,
for larger (~14 nm) nanocarriers, no difference in tumour accumulation
was observed between passive and active targeting. Active
targeting did, however, change the intratumoural compartmentalization
of the nanocarriers, increasing their uptake by cancer cells.
In line with this, it was shown that 70–80 nm-sized HER2-targeted
gold nanoparticles21 and 100 nm-sized HER2-targeted liposomes22
accumulate to a higher extent in cancer cells than in macrophages,
but do not achieve higher tumour concentrations. These scenarios
underline the importance of critically reflecting on the added value
of active targeting in cancer nanomedicine applications. In our
view, actively targeted nanomedicines will be mainly beneficial for
the treatment of haematological cancers (in which significant numbers
of cancer cells are present in systemic circulation), in set-ups in
which certain immune cells are targeted (in the blood stream and/or
in MPS organs), and when the therapeutic payload needs to be delivered
intracellularly (for example, in the case of RNA drugs employed
to modulate gene expression).
Imaging biomarkers. The use of liquid and tissue biopsy biomarkers
is less straightforward in the case of passively targeted
nanomedicines, as there are no surface receptors available for
immunohistochemical staining or CTC assessment. Accordingly,
these nanomedicines likely require imaging probes and protocols
for patient stratification (Fig. 2). Several recent studies have
established companion nanodiagnostics and nanotheranostics
to address EPR effect heterogeneity and to predict nanotherapy
outcomes23,24. For example, ferumoxytol (that is, FDA-approved
30 nm iron oxide nanoparticles used to treat iron deficiency anaemia)
can be used ‘off-label’ to characterize EPR heterogeneity via
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)25. Ferumoxytol-enhanced
MRI correlated with therapeutic nanoparticle uptake in tumourassociated
macrophages (TAM) and enabled prediction of tumour
accumulation and anti-tumour efficacy25. In the clinic, ferumoxytolenhanced
MRI in patients with mixed solid tumours demonstrated
that higher ferumoxytol accumulation levels correlated
with greater lesion size reductions following treatment with liposomal
irinotecan (Onivyde)26. Although such MRI-based companion
diagnostics are relatively cost effective, they require pre- and
post-contrast MRI, which complicates the analysis, particularly
in regions with variable soft tissue contrast. An alternative companion
nanodiagnostic approach is positron emission tomography
(PET) imaging with 89Zr-labelled nanoreporter liposomes, which
accurately predicted Doxil accumulation and efficacy using a
single PET scan27. Besides predicting tumour accumulation, imaging
biomarkers can also be employed to assess responses to nanomedicine
therapies. Tumour metabolism — as opposed to that in
healthy cells — largely relies on aerobic glycolysis, a phenomenon
known as the Warburg effect28. This phenomenon is clinically routinely
visualized and quantified using 18F-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose
(18F-FDG)-based PET imaging29. 18F-FDG PET imaging can be
employed to assess early responses to nanomedicine therapies, for
example, to nano-photothermal therapy30. A related and highly
interesting future direction in this regard is imaging and targeting
of amino acid metabolism in tumours. Particularly glutamine
metabolism31,32, but also the availability and consumption of aspartate33
and asparagine34 have recently been shown to be involved in
tumour growth and/or metastasis. Nanomedicine formulations
interfering with these pathways and imaging agents capturing these
pathways are envisaged to hold significant potential for improving
cancer therapy.
Cancer nanomedicines can in principle be co-loaded with drugs
and with imaging agents, to directly visualize and quantify target
site accumulation. Such theranostic formulations provide the most
specific information on biodistribution and tumour accumulation,
thereby ruling out issues related to differences in physicochemical
and pharmacokinetic properties between nanodiagnostics and nanotherapeutics.
However, these formulations are more difficult to translate
to the clinic and lack the flexibility and versatility of companion
nanodiagnostics, which allow for example, for decision making prior
to starting treatment. A pioneering clinical study involving nanotheranostics
recently showed that PET combined with computed tomography
(CT) can assess the tumour accumulation of 64Cu-labelled
HER2-targeted liposomal doxorubicin in HER2-positive metastatic
breast cancer patients. Higher target site accumulation levels corresponded
with more favourable therapeutic outcomes35. Interestingly,
molecules such as doxorubicin and alendronate can function as
chelators, to enable easy and efficient in vivo monitoring of target
site accumulation36. This smart and straightforward approach to
obtain radiolabelled liposomal drugs opens up new theranostic
opportunities for patient stratification in cancer nanomedicine.
It has to be kept in mind, however, that nanomedicine accumulation
in tumours must be followed by payload release to achieve
therapeutic benefits, since for most nanomedicines, the formulated
drugs have to be liberated to become pharmacologically active.
Drugs can be spontaneously released from nanocarriers in tumours,
for example free doxorubicin is released from Doxil37, and this can
also be mediated by TAM38. Monitoring drug release in vivo is
possible using contrast-enhanced MRI and optical imaging. Both
methods, however, have limited translational relevance, because
of the potential toxicity associated with co-loading high amounts
of gadolinium in nanomedicines, and because of the limited
penetration depth of optical imaging, respectively. Consequently,
studies in two-dimensional (2D) cell culture, in 3D spheroids and
in preclinical mouse models should encompass mechanistic analyses
on drug release and target cell uptake upon nanomedicinemediated
delivery.
As an alternative to companion nanodiagnostics and nanotheranostics,
clinically established (but intuitively significantly
less specific) ‘standard’ imaging protocols could be considered to
predict the accumulation and efficacy of passively targeted cancer
nanomedicines, such as dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI39, CT40
and ultrasound41. Furthermore, future analyses should set out to
evaluate if histopathological assessment of tumour biopsies can
help to stratify responders from non-responders. Tumour biopsies
are readily available for the vast majority of patients, and scoring,
for example, vessel and macrophage density and distribution is
hypothesized to be reasonably useful for predicting nanomedicine
accumulation and efficacy.
Drug selection
Rational drug selection is crucial for making cancer nanomedicines
clinically and commercially successful. Preclinically, most nanomedicine
publications deal with re-formulating established chemotherapeutic
drugs, and all clinically approved cancer nanomedicines
(antibody–drug conjugates excluded) are based on standard cytostatics,
such as doxorubicin, daunorubicin, paclitaxel, vincristine
and irinotecan42. For all of these agents, nanomedicine re-formulation
improves the therapeutic index, but typically mostly by
attenuating side effects, not by inducing significantly improved therapeutic
responses. In this context, specific nanomedicine-related
side effects, such as complement-mediated infusion reactions43,
have to be kept in mind, and a better mechanistic understanding
of these effects, and the identification of efficient ways of dealing
with them, is crucial for maximizing nanomedicines’ impact on the
therapeutic index5. In addition, future efforts in cancer nanomedicine
drug development should focus more on the use of nanocarrier
materials for the delivery of non-standard drugs such as biologics,
and they should increasingly encompass smart strategies such
as drug derivatization, modular nanocarrier design and library
screening (Fig. 3).
Drug classes. Standard chemotherapeutic drugs, such as doxorubicin
and paclitaxel, do come with side effects, but are overall
reasonably well tolerated by patients; otherwise they would not
have become drug products. Newer, more potent, agents, such as
auristatins, are too toxic to be administered to patients in free form.
To enable the in vivo use of auristatins, antibody–drug conjugates
have been developed, such as brentuximab vedotin (Adcetris), which
is approved to treat CD30+ haematological cancers. Antibody–drug
conjugates, however, typically have very low payloads. To explore
formulations with higher auristatin payloads, polymeric nanoparticles
containing thousands of drug molecules were developed.
These nanoparticles achieved efficient tumour growth inhibition
and prolonged survival as compared to standard of care (cisplatin)
in a patient-derived xenograft model of ovarian cancer, without
significant systemic toxicity44. Similarly, a potent Aurora B kinase
inhibitor — which in free form caused unacceptable side effects in
a phase II clinical trial — increased efficacy and reduced toxicity in
multiple preclinical models upon reformulation in PEG-PLA-based
nanoparticles45.
Nanocarrier technologies also play a prominent role in the development
of DNA- and RNA-based drugs. Nucleic acid agents critically
rely on protection against degradation in systemic circulation
and they generally require intracellular delivery. The nanotechnology
used in Onpattro (patisiran, liver-targeted siRNA-containing
lipid nanoparticles for the treatment of transthyretin-related
hereditary amyloidosis46) is facilitating the development of other
genetic nanomedicines, such as RNA-based vaccines for treating
infections and cancer47,48. These vaccines contain RNA encoding
for therapeutic proteins and upon delivery to hepatocytes, the
liver is utilized as a bio-factory for protein production49. Similarly,
nanoparticles carrying RNA encoding for tumour antigens can be
delivered to antigen-presenting cells in the liver and spleen to elicit
T cell-mediated anti-tumour effects50–52. Several such nucleic acidbased
nanovaccines have recently entered clinical trials for cancer
immunotherapy47,50,53.
Proteins are another class of therapeutics that benefit from nanocarrier
delivery, for instance by abrogating the systemic toxicity of
immunostimulatory agents such as interleukin-2 (IL2) for immunooncology
applications54. NKTR-214 (bempegaldesleukin), that is, a
biologic prodrug comprising IL2 with 6 conjugated releasable PEG
chains, significantly inhibited tumour growth in a melanoma mouse
model compared to unmodified IL2 (aldesleukin) and it synergized
with checkpoint inhibitor therapy55. NKTR-214 treatment was furthermore
found to be well tolerated in non-human primates55 and
in patients with advanced or metastatic solid tumours56.
Modular design. Nanomedicine design has traditionally been formulation
driven; for every new nanodrug, the carrier material and
formulation process need to be adjusted to the payload’s physicochemical
properties. While this approach is inherently inflexible, it
can be applied to therapeutics with similar characteristics. For example,
pH gradient-based remote loading has been widely employed
to entrap amphiphilic and ionizable drugs, such as doxorubicin,
in liposomes57. As an alternative, drug molecules can be (re-)engineered
to improve their compatibility with nanocarriers. For example,
rational chemical derivatization of doxorubicin modified the
drug’s hydrophobicity and miscibility with PLGA nanoparticles to
improve drug–nanocarrier compatibility and therapeutic efficacy58.
Analogously, a hydrolysable ester linker conjugated to docetaxel
enabled stable incorporation in core-crosslinked polymeric micelles
while still allowing for controlled drug release. A single intravenous
injection of polymeric micelles loaded with the docetaxel derivative
induced complete tumour regression in a xenograft model of breast
cancer59. This platform is currently being evaluated in a phase II
trial for treatment of ovarian cancer60. Using a similar ester linker
technology, fatty acids conjugated to cabazitaxel inducted prodrugs
and PEG-lipids to self-assemble into nanoparticles. The resulting
PEGylated cabazitaxel-prodrug had reduced systemic toxicity and
superior therapeutic efficacy when compared to free cabazitaxel in
mice bearing breast cancer xenografts61.
Drug derivatization techniques are increasingly used to develop
modular nanomedicine platforms. Synthesizing prodrugs that stably
incorporate in nanocarriers reduces differences among drug
molecules’ physicochemical properties, thereby improving the
encapsulation predictability of drugs with diverse characteristics.
In addition, modular prodrug nanomedicines can be employed to
control localized drug release, which reduces systemic exposure
and side effects. For example, a smart prodrug-based modular
nanomedicine platform stably co-encapsulated doxorubicin and
monomethyl auristatin E (which are physicochemically very different),
and allowed for prodrug activation via the administration of a
separate nanoparticle, together achieving improved selectivity and
treatment efficacy in fibrosarcoma-bearing mice62.
Screening nanomedicine libraries. Drug derivatization and modular
concepts combined with rapid and scalable production methods
have been expediting the formation of nanomedicine libraries
for candidate selection during preclinical nanodrug development.
Accordingly, efficient in vitro and in vivo screening methods need
to be established to evaluate such libraries. Traditional approaches
only vary a few parameters, such as size and surface charge, when
exploring a new nanomedicine’s pharmaceutical properties and
pharmacological performance. Novel production methods, such
as microfluidics, facilitate the generation of large nanomedicinal
libraries and thereby promote systematic screening of multiple
parameters. Such microfluidic production protocols were employed
in the development of BIND-014 (that is, PSMA-targeted polymeric
nanoparticles containing docetaxel)63. To optimize BIND-
014, a combinatorial polymeric nanoparticle library was formed
and subsequently screened for nanoparticle size, ligand density,
drug encapsulation and release kinetics. Formulations with the
most favourable characteristics were taken forward for pharmacokinetic,
biodistribution, tolerability and therapeutic efficacy studies
in animal models, and the most optimal formulation was eventually
tested in patients63.
In pursuit of innovative nano-immunotherapeutics, PET imaging
and flow cytometry were used to evaluate the biodistribution
and immune cell specificity of a library of high-density lipoproteinmimicking
nanoparticles. To advance cancer vaccine development,
libraries of lipid nanoparticles containing mRNA encoding for the
model protein ovalbumin52 were screened for the percentages of
ovalbumin-specific CD8+ T cells 7 days after subcutaneous injection.
After a two-step library selection to optimize lipid components
and molar composition, the formulation that induced the highest
number of specific CD8+ T cells was loaded with mRNA encoding
for tumour-associated antigens, resulting in improved survival of
mice bearing B16-F10 melanoma tumours52. Barcoding methods
are useful in library screening. Deep sequencing of nucleic acidbased
barcodes in tissues upon the intravenous administration of
30 barcoded lipid nanoparticles helped to identify a nanoparticle
formulation capable of delivering functional siRNA and sgRNA
to bone marrow endothelial cells64,65. Another smart barcoding
approach involved the co-loading of different chemotherapeutics
together with DNA barcodes in PEGylated liposomes that were
administered to mice, followed by tumour biopsy 48 h later. PCR
barcode detection and cell viability assessment in isolated tumour
cells could predict the most effective chemotherapeutic treatment
in a mouse model of breast cancer66.
Combination therapies
Depending on their location, grade and stage, cancers are treated
with a combination of surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy and/
or immunotherapy. Strikingly, however, clinical trials involving
nanomedicines are generally designed for evaluation in monotherapy
settings. This makes it difficult to compare nanodrugs
to standard of care in terms of efficacy and, more importantly, it
does not optimally exploit some of the intrinsic capabilities of
nanomedicine formulations. Indeed, nanomedicines combine well
with standard chemotherapy treatments, they can co-encapsulate
multiple drugs in one formulation and they interact with external
stimuli more effectively than drugs in free form. Regarding the
latter, (1) nanomedicines depend more on vascular perfusion and
permeability than small molecule drugs, and these features profit
from using pharmacological and physical combination therapies;
(2) nanomedicines deliver higher amounts of drugs to pathological
sites, and keep them there for prolonged periods of time, thereby
beneficially affecting locally applied physical combination therapies;
and (3) nanomedicines can be designed to specifically respond
to locally applied physical triggers, for example, via inducing drug
release. These aspects should be exploited more extensively to create
more effective anticancer combination therapies (Fig. 4).
Systemic combination therapies. The value of incorporating nanomedicines
in systemic combination therapies is exemplified by
liposomal irinotecan (Onivyde), which has recently been approved
in combination with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and leucovorin (LV) to
treat pancreatic cancer. Although irinotecan is a very potent anticancer
drug, its application in free form is hampered by severe
side effects that lead to poor patient compliance. While liposomal
irinotecan alone did not improve overall survival as compared to
5-FU/LV in pancreatic cancer patients, the combination of liposomal
irinotecan and 5-FU/LV significantly improved overall survival
with very acceptable toxicity profiles67,68. A similarly promising systemic
combination therapy is nanoparticle albumin-bound paclitaxel
(Abraxane) combined with the immune checkpoint inhibitor
atezolizumab, which together induced unprecedented therapeutic
responses in triple-negative breast cancer patients69.
Cancer nanomedicines are increasingly combined with systemically
administered drugs that help overcome barriers associated
with tumour-targeted drug delivery. Multiple biological, immunological
and translational barriers have been identified that need to
be tackled when aiming to increase cancer nanomedicine’s clinical
impact and performance5. Biological barriers include the dense
extracellular matrix (ECM), the high interstitial fluid pressure (IFP)
and the high metabolism in tumours. The angiotensin II receptor
inhibitor losartan can be used to inhibit TGF-β signalling and attenuate
collagen production by cancer-associated fibroblasts, thereby
reducing the ECM content and the IFP in tumours, and improving
the delivery and efficacy of both conventional nanomedicines
and 100-nm-sized oncolytic viruses70,71. Recently, losartan has been
shown to substantially increase the fraction of R0 resections upon
FOLFIRINOX-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy in pancreatic cancer,
likely via alleviating the impact of some of the above biological
barriers72,73. The enhanced cellular metabolism within tumours
results in a relatively low extracellular pH (pH 6.5–7) and re-adjusting
this metabolic phenotype can help to promote the performance
of drug and drug delivery systems. As an example, in a recent study,
100-nm liposomes loaded with sodium bicarbonate were shown to
be able to increase the intratumoural pH to ~7.4, thereby enhancing
the cellular uptake of doxorubicin via preventing its protonation
and hydrophilization74.
Nanomedicines are also intrinsically very useful for systemic
combination therapy. For example, Vyxeos is a liposomal nanomedicine
formulation co-loaded with cytarabine and daunorubicin at a
synergistic drug ratio of 5:1, ensuring controllable pharmacokinetics
and co-delivery for both entrapped agents, that can be used to
‘ratiometrically’ kill cancer cells. In a phase III trial in patients with
acute myeloid leukaemia, Vyxeos improved survival as compared
to standard of care from 6 to 10 months75, resulting in fast-track
FDA approval.
Local combination therapies. Cancer nanomedicines combine well
with locally confined treatment modalities, such as radiotherapy,
ultrasound and hyperthermia. Pre-treating tumours with radiotherapy
increases nanomedicine accumulation and penetration,
and vice versa, nanocarrier materials improve radiochemotherapy
outcomes76,77. Radiotherapy combined with cyclophosphamide can
prime tumours for more efficient delivery and efficacy of liposomal
irinotecan78. In addition, nanomedicines can capture tumour
antigens released by radiotherapy and subsequently deliver them
to antigen-presenting cells, resulting in significantly improved
immunotherapy outcomes via promotion of the abscopal effect79.
Ultrasound can be combined with microbubbles to enhance
tumour-targeted drug delivery via sonopermeation80, the effects
of which include opening inter-endothelial junctions, promoting
endocytosis and transcytosis, and — particularly in highly stromal
tumours — improving vascular perfusion5. Initial clinical proof of
concept for sonopermeation showed that combining gemcitabine
with ultrasound and microbubbles in pancreatic cancer patients
resulted in a median survival time of 18 months, as compared to
9 months for a historical cohort treated with gemcitabine alone81.
When combined with intravenously administered microbubbles, a
1 cm-sized skull-implantable ultrasound device termed SonoCloud
can open up the blood–brain barrier (BBB), promoting carboplatin
delivery in patients with glioblastoma82. For externally applied
ultrasound, magnetic resonance-guided focused ultrasound can
feasibly and safely improve (nano-)drug delivery in patients with
primary brain tumours83.
The clinically most advanced approach combining nanomedicines
with locally applied physical treatments involves the use of
temperature-sensitive doxorubicin-loaded liposomes (Thermodox).
In combination with radiofrequency ablation-based hyperthermia,
Thermodox did not meet its primary endpoint in a phase III trial
for treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), for a number of
reasons. It did however demonstrate improved progression-free and
overall survival in a subset of patients84. A follow-up phase III trial
in HCC, with rigorously refined RFA settings, has recently been
completed, and the outcomes of this study are eagerly awaited85.
Furthermore, in the last couple of years, several additional trials
have recently been initiated in which Thermodox is combined with
focused ultrasound-based hyperthermia, for example, for breast
cancer and certain paediatric tumours80,86.
Immunomodulation
Immune checkpoint inhibitors87 and chimeric antigen receptor
(CAR) T cell therapies88 are radically changing the cancer therapy
landscape, as evidenced by remarkable recent clinical results.
Empowering the body’s immune system has produced long-lasting
anti-tumour responses in patients with cancer types and stages that
were deemed very difficult or impossible to treat. Most impressively,
long-term follow-up studies show that a subset of patients
have experienced complete remission thus far for up to a decade.
Unfortunately, however, the majority of cancer patients do not
respond to immunotherapy. To improve immunotherapy outcomes,
we have to expand our understanding of both systemic
anti-tumour immunity and the local tumour immune microenvironment
(TIME)89. This knowledge will guide the development of
drugs and drug delivery systems that boost the efficacy of immunooncological
interventions5.
Since its inception in the late 1990s, cancer nanomedicine
development has been based on designing drug delivery systems
that evade the immune system and transport therapeutic payloads
directly to tumour cells. We now understand that nanomedicines’
true potential may actually lie in their ability to engage the immune
system. Deploying nanotherapeutics for immuno-oncological
purposes90–92 necessitates nanoformulations that can smartly
modulate the adaptive and/or the innate immune system (Fig. 5).
We anticipate it will soon become feasible to engineer nanomedicines
that boost the immune system’s ability to fight cancer and/or
improve the efficacy of existing immunotherapies while mitigating
some of their side effects, which can be quite severe93,94.
Targeting the adaptive immune system. In line with currently
approved anticancer immunotherapeutics, most immunomodulating
nanomedicines target the adaptive immune system. These
formulations are generally designed to elicit anti-tumour effects via
generating CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses, inducing or improving
antigen presentation (signal 1), modulating co-stimulatory signals
(signal 2) and/or triggering cytokine production (signal 3). In addition,
immunomodulating nanomedicines can be devised to alter the
TIME and thereby increase susceptibility to immunotherapy.
Nanomedicines that deliver chemotherapeutics such as doxorubicin
and oxaliplatin to tumours can promote anti-tumour immunity
by inducing immunogenic cell death (ICD), thereby potentiating the
effects of checkpoint blockade immunotherapeutics95. A key reason
for why ICD-inducing nanomedicines generate better immunotherapy
outcomes than ICD-inducing free drugs is that systemic drug
exposure is reduced in case of the former, resulting in less systemic
immunodepression. Nanomedicines can also curtail the activity
of soluble immuno-inhibitors, like indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase
(IDO). IDO plays a key role in cancer immune metabolism, promoting
the conversion of tryptophan to kynurenine, thereby inducing
immunosuppression96. Nanomedicines containing IDO inhibitors
inactivate this immunosuppressive metabolic pathway. As an example,
nanoparticles containing oxaliplatin and a small molecule IDO
inhibitor induced regression in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
mouse models following both local and systemic administration97.
Similarly, in a mouse model of metastatic breast cancer, the therapeutic
efficacy of anti-PD-1 therapy was improved by a nano-coformulation
of doxorubicin and an IDO inhibitor98.
As described in the ‘Drug selection’ section, developing personalized
cancer vaccines is the most clinically advanced genetic
drug application in oncology. These vaccines consist of an ionizable
lipid-based carrier system loaded with mRNA encoding for
patient-specific tumour antigens50–52. In such set-ups, the nanocarrier
formulation protects the payload following subcutaneous52 or
intravenous50,51 administration, thereby ensuring efficient antigen
delivery to antigen-presenting cells and subsequently inducing
effective anti-tumour T cell responses. The interchangeable RNA
payloads can be designed to encode either for tumour-associated
self-antigens shared by patients with a specific tumour type or
for patient-specific neoepitopes, thus creating truly personalized
cancer vaccines47.
Analogous to some of the results described in the ‘Combination
therapies’ section, studies show that under certain circumstances,
radiotherapy effects can synergize with immune checkpoint blockade-
based interventions99. In this regard, there is growing evidence
that the abscopal effect, whereby local radiotherapy treatment at
the primary tumour site can induce regression in distant metastatic
lesions, can augment immunotherapy, particularly when combined
with smart nanomedicine formulations100.
Targeting the innate immune system. Most nano-immunotherapies
target the adaptive immune system; modulating components
of the innate immune system has thus far remained largely
unexplored92,101. The innate immune system functions as a rapid and
relatively non-specific first line of defence against infections, mediated
by the complement system and by cells such as phagocytes and
natural killer cells. These cells contain pattern recognition receptors
(PRRs), which detect pathogen-associated molecular patterns
(PAMPs) and damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs).
PAMPs and DAMPs can induce an innate immune response and
subsequently activate the adaptive immune system92. It is becoming
increasingly clear that metabolic and epigenetic modifications
underlying these responses coordinate a primitive form of innate
immune memory referred to as ‘trained immunity’102,103, which
is systemically regulated and preserved by hematopoietic stem
cells and progenitor cells in the bone marrow. Accordingly, nanomedicines
with bone marrow avidity may help to induce trained
immunity to suppress local and metastatic tumour growth92.
Alternatively, nanomedicine-based approaches can be designed
to induce innate anti-tumour immune responses via activation
of PRRs on dendritic cells (DCs) in the TIME, including toll-like
receptors (TLRs), retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)-like receptors
(RLRs) and stimulator of interferon genes (STING). Activating
PRRs results in multiple signalling cascades such as transcription
of type I interferons (IFN-1). In turn, IFN-1 activates DCs and
induces anti-tumour T cell immunity, providing opportunities to
reprogramme immunologically ‘cold’ tumours into ‘hot’ tumours
that are susceptible to checkpoint inhibitor therapy. As an example,
cyclodextrin nanoparticles encapsulating the TLR7/8 agonist R848
have been shown to enhance cancer immunotherapy, by promoting
the polarization of TAM towards an M1-like phenotype96. As
a monotherapy, the nanoparticles modulated the immunosuppressive
TIME to inhibit tumour growth. The R848-containing
formulation furthermore boosted checkpoint inhibitor therapy, in
a tumour model unresponsive to anti-PD-1 monotherapy. RLRs
are sensor proteins that recognize cytosolic double-stranded RNA.
RIG-1 preferentially binds 5’-triphosphorylated RNA and short
double-stranded RNA. As such, bispecific siRNAs with 5’-triphosphate
ends can be designed to specifically silence an oncogene
and to also activate RIG-1. Exploiting this dual strategy, treatment
with lipid-coated calcium phosphate nanoparticles containing
double-stranded 5’-triphosphorylated anti-Bcl2 siRNA inhibited
tumour growth and prolonged survival in mice with orthotopic
pancreatic cancer97. STING is a key regulatory protein that triggers
an IFN-1 response upon detection of cytosolic double-stranded
DNA (dsDNA). DsDNA is recognized by cyclic GMP-AMP synthase
(cGAS), which induces the production of cyclic guanosine
monophosphate-adenosine monophosphate (cGAMP; that is, the
high affinity ligand for STING), resulting in a type I interferon
response104. Nanomedicines are very useful for activating this type of
immune response, as cGAMP and other STING agonists are cyclic
dinucleotides, and need to be present intracellularly to be recognized
by cGAS. As an example, polymersomes designed to enhance
cytosolic cGAMP delivery potently inhibited tumour growth and
prolonged survival in a mouse melanoma model (alone and in
combination with checkpoint inhibitor therapy)105.
Outlook
Improving the clinical impact of cancer nanomedicines requires
smart thinking and rational and realistic reasoning. In this perspective,
we present four strategic directions to boost cancer nanomedicine
performance, translation and exploitation. Like in other areas
of oncology drug development, probes and protocols for patient
stratification are urgently needed to refine cancer nanomedicine
clinical trials. Smart strategies for modular (pro)drug and nanocarrier
design as well as library screening will help to maximize the
chances that those formulations developed and tested preclinically
will eventually perform well in patients. Rationally designed pharmacological
and physical combination regimens will amplify the
pharmacokinetic and/or pharmacodynamic benefits conferred by
entrapping drugs in nanomedicine formulations. Finally, uncovering
which pathophysiological features constrain the efficacy of
current cancer immunotherapies, and developing immunomodulatory
nanomedicines accordingly, will help to improve the outcomes
of immuno-oncological interventions and increase the number of
long-term survivors.
Beyond the strategies discussed above, several additional directions
can be considered to assist in improving the impact of cancer
nanomedicine. For instance, the field may profit from implementing
guidelines for minimal information reporting to standardize
preclinical nanomedicine research and thus promote reproducibility,
quantitative comparisons, meta-analyses and modelling106.
Furthermore, while the majority of nanomedicine formulations
are developed for intravenous application, it may be advantageous
to also explore other administration routes. For example, certain
antibody-based therapeutics, such as Humira (that is, adalimumab;
anti-TNF), work well upon subcutaneous self-administration,
which provides the advantage of at-home self-administration versus
clinical intravenous administration, thereby mitigating the
need for hospitalization. Such alternative routes of administration,
which have thus far received relatively little consideration in case
of nanomedicines, may provide significant advantages in terms of
applicability, cost, efficacy and toxicity.
The cancer nanomedicine field has expanded exponentially in
recent years. In stark contrast to the numerous new materials and
papers that are being produced, only about a dozen nanomedicinal
anticancer drugs (antibody–drug conjugates included) have thus far
made it to the market. To change this situation, we must move away
from continuously making increasingly complex nanomedicine
materials and critically reconsider how we are doing translational
cancer nanomedicine research. We must establish smart strategies
to make nanomedicines work, in as many patients as possible. This
shift requires rational and realistic thinking, and integrated and
concerted efforts from consortia comprising academics, clinicians,
pharmaceutical companies and regulatory authorities. The strategic
directions outlined in this manuscript aim to streamline translational
cancer nanomedicine research and they will help to promote
the clinical impact and patient performance of nanomedicinal
anticancer drugs.
Fig. 1 | Smart strategies and materials to advance and refine cancer
nanomedicine treatments. Four directions are proposed that — on
their own and especially together — will promote the translation and
exploitation of nanomedicinal anticancer drugs.
Fig. 2 | Smart strategies for patient stratification in cancer nanomedicine. Several probes and protocols can be employed for patient stratification,
including circulating tumour cell (CTC) analysis, immunohistochemical (IHC) assessment of the tumour microenvironment, and direct and indirect
imaging of nanomedicine tumour accumulation. These approaches vary in simplicity, specificity and applicability for passively versus actively targeted
nanomedicines. Liquid biomarkers are the most straightforward and least invasive, but may not be predictive enough to serve as standalone biomarkers
for tailoring nanomedicine treatment. Tissue biomarkers are easily available, but are likely more useful for actively than passively targeted nanomedicines,
and their predictive power needs to be explored. Imaging biomarkers can rely on approved contrast agents and companion nanodiagnostics, which are
available off the shelf. This contributes to simplicity, but the information obtained may not be specific enough. Nanotheranostics provide highly specific
information on the target site accumulation of the formulation in question, but are more challenging from a translational point of view. MRI, magnetic
resonance imaging; PET/CT, positron emission tomography/computed tomography.
Fig. 3 | Smart drug selection in cancer nanomedicine. Rational drug selection is crucial to ensure clinical and commercial success. Multiple strategies can
be envisaged to connect the right drug to the right nanocarrier for the right indication. Drug classes: Nanomedicines can be loaded with different types of
anticancer drugs, including standard chemotherapeutics, highly potent toxins, biologics and nucleic acids. Prodrugs can be engineered to ensure optimal
compatibility with nanocarrier formulations, including, for example, drug coupling via ester linkers to an aliphatic chain for efficient incorporation in lipidbased
nanomedicines. Modularity: Nanomedicines can be designed to encapsulate payloads with comparable/compatible properties, such as RNA or
small molecule prodrugs. Screening: Nanomedicine libraries can be produced via high-throughput technologies. Various labelling and analytical techniques
can be employed to identify nanomedicine candidates with optimal properties for in vivo performance.
Fig. 4 | Smart cancer nanomedicine-based combination therapies. Systemic combinations: (1) Integrating nanomedicines in multimodal chemotherapy
regimens results in reduced side effects, better patient compliance and improved quality of life; (2) Nanomedicines enable ratiometric multi-drug
delivery, which contributes to synergistic drug effects by improving control over pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic interactions; (3) Co-treatment
with approved drugs, such as losartan, helps prime blood vessels and the tumour microenvironment (TME) for improved delivery, thereby enhancing
the accumulation, penetration and efficacy of cancer nanomedicines. Local combination: (4) Radiotherapy treatment alters the TME to improve
the accumulation, penetration, retention and efficacy of cancer nanomedicines. In addition, nanomedicines can potentiate the abscopal effect upon
radiotherapy; (5) Ultrasound and microbubbles can induce sonopermeation, thereby increasing vascular perfusion and permeability, and nanomedicine
accumulation and efficacy; (6) Hyperthermia can be used to locally trigger payload release from temperature-sensitive liposomes, resulting in increased
drug concentrations at the pathological site and less systemic drug exposure, thereby improving the balance between drug efficacy and toxicity.
Fig. 5 | Smart immunomodulation involving cancer nanomedicine. Nanomedicines can be designed to target and modulate components of the adaptive and
innate immune systems, thereby improving the outcome of immune checkpoint inhibition therapy. Adaptive immune system-targeted approaches include:
(1) Directly targeting antigen-presenting cells by using nanomedicines to deliver (RNA encoding for) tumour antigens and/or drug molecules that modulate
co-stimulation and cytokine production. These approaches result in anti-tumour effects mediated via generating and/or activating CD4+ and CD8+ T cells;
(2) Nanomedicines can change the polarization of tumour-associated macrophages (TAMs) from a pro-tumour and anti-immunotherapy (M2-like)
phenotype into a more anti-tumour and pro-immunotherapy (M1-like) phenotype; (3) Nanomedicines containing chemotherapeutic drugs, such as
doxorubicin and oxaliplatin, can boost the induction of immunogenic cell death, which helps reprogram immunogenically ‘cold’ tumours into ‘hot’ tumours.
Innate immune system-targeted approaches include: (4) Reprogramming tumours into an immunogenically ‘hot’ phenotype via the activation of PRRs,
eliciting a type I interferon response and inducing anti-tumour T cell immunity; and (5) Nanomedicines can be developed to deliver drugs to myeloid cells
and their progenitors in the bone marrow, resulting in specific metabolic and epigenetic changes. The ensuing myeloid cells’ hyper-responsiveness towards
secondary stimuli has become known as ‘trained immunity’ and may help improve the efficacy of (checkpoint inhibition-based) cancer immunotherapy.
