Smoking Cessation and Lung Function in Mild-to-
Moderate Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
The Lung Health Study
PAUL D. SCANLON, JOHN E. CONNETT, LANCE A. WALLER, MURRAY D. ALTOSE, WILLIAM C. BAILEY,
A. SONIA BUIST, and DONALD P. TASHKIN for the Lung Health Study Research Group
Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Mayo Foundation, Rochester, Minnesota; Division of Biostatistics, School of Public
Health, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota; Department of Biostatistics, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University,
Atlanta, Georgia; Veterans Hospital, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio; Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine,
Department of Medicine, University of Alabama School of Medicine, Birmingham, Alabama; Department of Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Birmingham, Alabama; Department of Medicine and Physiology, Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland, Oregon; and
Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California
Previous studies of lung function in relation to smoking cessation have not adequately quantified the
long-term benefit of smoking cessation, nor established the predictive value of characteristics such as
airway hyperresponsiveness. In a prospective randomized clinical trial at 10 North American medical
centers, we studied 3,926 smokers with mild-to-moderate airway obstruction (3,818 with analyzable
results; mean age at entry, 48.5 yr; 36% women) randomized to one of two smoking cessation groups
or to a nonintervention group. We measured lung function annually for 5 yr. Participants who
stopped smoking experienced an improvement in FEV1 in the year after quitting (an average of 47 ml
or 2%). The subsequent rate of decline in FEV1 among sustained quitters was half the rate among
continuing smokers, 31
6 48 versus 62
6 55 ml (mean
6 SD), comparable to that of never-smokers.
Predictors of change in lung function included responsiveness to
b-agonist, baseline FEV1, methacholine
reactivity, age, sex, race, and baseline smoking rate. Respiratory symptoms were not predictive of
changes in lung function. Smokers with airflow obstruction benefit from quitting despite previous
heavy smoking, advanced age, poor baseline lung function, or airway hyperresponsiveness. Scanlon
PD, Connett JE, Waller LA, Altose MD, Bailey WC, Buist AS, Tashkin DP, for the Lung Health
Study Research Group. Smoking cessation and lung function in mild-to-moderate chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: The Lung Health Study.

In 1996, 106,146 Americans died from chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD), the fourth leading cause of death in
the United States (1). Ten to 15% of all smokers (2) and up to
26% of heavy smokers (3) develop COPD. As the prevalence
of smoking has risen among women and decreased slightly
among men, the sexual distribution of COPD deaths has
shifted from 19% female in 1970 to 38.5% in 1993 (4).
Factors that contribute to the development of COPD include
tobacco smoking, particularly heavy smoking, long duration
of smoking, and smoking of high-tar cigarettes. Other factors
associated with the development of COPD include poor
initial lung function, advanced age, male sex, childhood respiratory
illness, occupational respiratory exposures, air pollution,
low educational attainment or socioeconomic status,
blood type A or AB,
a1 protease deficiency, and other familial
factors (5). With the exception of
a1 protease deficiency, these
factors contribute to, but do not by themselves cause, COPD.
In general, we cannot explain why some smokers are more
likely than others to develop impaired lung function, but it
seems likely that differences in susceptibility are related to asyet-
unknown genetic factors.
The Dutch hypothesis (6) states that the risks of COPD
and asthma are related to environmental exposures in combination
with the genetic makeup of the individual. Bronchial
hyperresponsiveness is one endogenous factor that may contribute
to the development of COPD (7). Genetic factors that
contribute to this risk are still poorly understood. We have no
way of modifying endogenous predisposition to asthma or
COPD. In contrast, the principal environmental factor in
COPD is well known—exposure to cigarette smoke—and it
can be modified. Hence, the most direct approach to reduce
the risk of COPD is to reduce cigarette smoking.
A low FEV1 predicts not only an increased rate of decline
in FEV1 (3, 8), but also morbidity and mortality from smoking-
related illnesses (COPD, lung cancer, and cardiovascular
disease) (9–11). Since lung function declines with time, the
best time to prevent morbidity and mortality from smokingrelated
illness should be early in the life. Unfortunately, most
smoking cessation intervention programs have had high relapse
rates (12).
In the Lung Health Study (LHS), smokers with mild-tomoderate
COPD were recruited to determine the effectiveness
of an intensive smoking cessation program plus maintenance
bronchodilator therapy in reducing the rate of decline in lung
function as well as morbidity and mortality. The intent-to-treat
analysis showed that participants randomized to the smoking
intervention program with or without maintenance bronchodilator
treatment had an improvement in pulmonary function
during the first year of the study, compared with control subjects,
but in subsequent years the decline in lung function was
parallel in all groups. Those who quit smoking had a greater
benefit compared with those who continued smoking (13). This
article reports further analysis of the effects of successful smoking
cessation on the lung function of participants in the LHS.
METHODS
Study Design and Recruitment
Recruitment was carried out from November 1986 to January 1989.
We sought current smokers, 35 to 60 yr of age, with mild-to-moderate
airflow obstruction who were otherwise healthy and who expressed a
willingness to participate in a 5-yr research program (14, 15). A total
of 5,887 participants was recruited at 10 centers in North America (16).
Participants were randomized, on a 2:1 basis, to engage in an intensive,
long-term smoking cessation program (special intervention, or
SI) or to receive usual care (UC). Participants in the SI group were
further randomized on a 1:1 basis to use either inhaled ipratropium
bromide (Atrovent [Boehringer Ingelheim, Ridgefield, CT], 18
mg/
puff; SI-A group) or an identical-appearing placebo administered by
metered-dose inhaler (2 puffs three times daily; SI-P group) for the
duration of the study. Participants in both groups completed annual
health questionnaires and lung function measurements. The UC group
did not participate in the intervention program. Each participant was
monitored for 5 yr (14, 15). The smoking cessation program was designed
to achieve a maximal sustained smoking cessation rate. Details
and results of the program have been reported previously (17).
Pulmonary Function Measurement
Spirometry was performed with a dry rolling-seal spirometer. A standardized
spirometry protocol, which exceeded the American Thoracic
Society (ATS) testing standards, and a strict quality control program
were used to obtain acceptable and reproducible data (18). The quality
control program and results of baseline pulmonary function studies
have been reported (19).
Screening spirometry was performed to identify smokers with an
FEV1/FVC ratio
< 0.75 and an FEV1 percent predicted (FEV1%
pred) between 50 and 90% of the value predicted for their age, height,
sex, and race (20). A second screening (Screen 2) visit confirmed eligibility
if prebronchodilator FEV1%pred was between 55 and 90% and
FEV1/FVC
< 0.70. Randomization was performed at the third screening
visit. A modified ATS-DLD-78 Respiratory Symptoms Questionnaire
(21) was administered, and measurement of methacholine reactivity
was performed at the third screening visit (22). Methacholine
reactivity was calculated from the dose–response curve, using the logarithm
of the percent decline in FEV1 between the postdiluent control
value and the value after the highest concentration of methacholine
administered (see Table 1 footnote) (23).
Follow-up Visits
Clinic visits were scheduled every 4 mo for SI participants. At these
visits, smoking status was monitored by questionnaire and measurement
of exhaled carbon monoxide (CO) with either a MiniCO model
1000 (Catalyst Research, Owings Mills, MD) or Vitalograph EC50
(Vitalograph, Buckingham, UK) (17). Inhaler canisters were exchanged
and weighed (24), and inhaler technique checked. Additional
smoking cessation intervention and counseling were provided as
needed to prevent relapse (17).
Annual clinic visits for all SI and UC participants included administration
of respiratory questionnaires, spirometry, and a request for
permission to obtain records of reported hospitalizations. Smoking
status was determined by self-report (
, 1 cigarette per week was considered
a nonsmoker), and validated with salivary cotinine assay and
exhaled CO measurement (25, 26).
Statistical Methods
We defined “sustained quitters” (Q) as those participants who were validated
by salivary cotinine or exhaled CO as abstinent at every annual
visit. “Continuing smokers” (S) were individuals who reported smoking
at each annual visit. We assume in this analysis that participants who
did not attend annual visits had continued smoking or relapsed. Those
who were not sustained quitters or continuing smokers were called “intermittent
quitters” (I). For the present analysis, all comparisons are between
sustained quitters and continuing smokers from the SI-P and the
UC groups. Members of the SI-A group (randomized to ipratropium)
were not included in this analysis to avoid the confounding effect of
bronchodilator therapy on the rate of decline in FEV1.
Statistical analyses were based on counts (for categorical data) or
means and standard deviations (for quantitative variables such as age,
cotinine levels, or FEV1%pred). Univariate comparisons between the
various smoking categories were assessed by
x2 statistics (for categorical
variables) or unpaired t tests (for quantitative variables). Comparisons
of outcome variables, when controlling for other factors, were done by
analysis of covariance. For univariate analyses, no adjustment was made
for multiple comparisons; nominal p values are displayed. For analyses
of the relationships between change in FEV1%pred and possible predictors,
the SI-P and UC groups were pooled. Rates of decline in lung function
within groups were calculated as the mean of individual slopes.
Multivariate linear regression analysis of the changes in postbronchodilator
FEV1%pred was performed using PROC GLM in the SAS
package (SAS, Cary, NC) (27). Separate analyses were performed for
changes from baseline to Year 1 and from Year 1 to Year 5. Variables
were entered stepwise, and were included in the final model if they
contributed significantly to the predictive power of the model. In
addition to smoking status, we considered baseline characteristics,
including treatment group (SI-P or UC), age, sex, FEV1%pred,
bronchodilator responsiveness, methacholine reactivity, smoking rate
(cigarettes per day), race, and respiratory symptoms. We analyzed
these individually, and looked for nonlinear effects and interaction
with smoking status. The results are summarized in terms of changes
in FEV1% pred associated with specified increments in the predictors
or the interaction terms in the models.
TABLE 1
BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS BY FINAL SMOKING STATUS: SI-P AND UC PARTICIPANTS
RESULTS
Baseline Characteristics
The SI-P and UC groups were similar at the time of entry into
the study (16). Table 1 shows baseline characteristics of 3,818
SI-P and UC participants with analyzable results, classified by
smoking status at the end of the study. Compared with continuing
smokers, sustained quitters were older at baseline,
smoked fewer cigarettes per day, had greater educational attainment,
lower salivary cotinine, higher body mass index,
higher FEV1%pred, and lower prevalence of chronic sputum
production.
Follow-up Rates
At Year 1, questionnaires were completed for more than 94%
of participants and spirometry was completed for more than
89% of participants. At Year 5, both questionnaires and spirometry
were completed for more than 94% of participants (13).
Smoking Cessation Rates
Using biochemically validated smoking cessation rates, 34.4% of
SI-P participants were abstinent (quitters) at Year 1, 37.4% were
abstinent at Year 5 (cross-sectional quit rate), and 22.3% remained
abstinent without relapse from Year 1 through Year 5
(sustained quitters). Among UC participants, 9.0% were abstinent
at Year 1, increasing to 21.4% at Year 5; 5.3% were
sustained quitters at Year 5 (13).
Effects of Smoking Cessation on
Changes in Lung Function
Study participants in the SI-P and UC groups who stopped
smoking in Year 1 had an average increase in FEV1 of 47 ml
or 1.98%pred at the Year 1 visit (Figure 1; see also Figure 5 in
Reference 13). Between Year 1 and Year 5, the sustained quitters
had a rate of decline in FEV1 of 31 +- 48 ml/yr or 0.27%
pred/yr.
In contrast, continuing smokers showed a more rapid rate
of decline in FEV1, both during the first year and between
Year 1 and Year 5. At the Year 1 visit, FEV1 had decreased by
49 ml or 0.74% pred. Between Year 1 and Year 5, FEV1 decreased
by 62 +- 55 ml/yr, twice the rate observed in sustained
quitters (p < 0.001, Table 2).
Participants who quit during the first year and then relapsed
after Year 1 showed a 1.59
6 5.04% decline in FEV1%
pred after relapsing (p < 0.001). Those participants who quit
smoking after the first year showed a 1.61 +- 5.62% improvement
in FEV1%pred after quitting (p < 0.001), which was also
comparable to the benefit observed in SI-P quitters at Year 1
(Figure 1).
Figure 1. Lung function improved during Year 1 among quitters,
but declined among continuing smokers. The subsequent rate of
decline is twice as great among continuing smokers as among sustained
quitters. Those who relapsed lost function and those who delayed
quitting benefited regardless of when they quit.
Effects of Baseline Lung Function
Continuing smokers with the lowest baseline FEV1 had larger
declines in the first year (
20.9
6 5.7%pred or
249
6 195 ml
for the lowest quintile) compared with those with the highest
baseline lung function (
20.03
6 4.91%pred or
229
6 172 ml
for the highest quintile, p
5 0.024). However, among quitters,
baseline lung function was not predictive of the degree of improvement
at Year 1 (p
. 0.10, results not shown).
Between Year 1 and Year 5, continuing smokers with the
lowest baseline FEV1%pred had the most rapid annual declines
in FEV1%pred:
21.6
6 2.1% pred/yr for the lowest
quintile versus
21.0
6 1.6%pred/yr for those in the highest
quintile (p
, 0.001; Figure 2). This trend did not hold for FEV1
itself: the annual rates of decline were
263
6 56 ml/yr for the
continuing smokers in the lowest quintile of baseline FEV1,
and
261
6 63 ml/yr for those in the highest quintile (NS). For
sustained and intermittent quitters, baseline FEV1 was not predictive
of Year 1 to Year 5 changes in FEV1 (ml/yr), and baseline
FEV1%pred was not as strongly related to changes in
FEV1%pred in quitters as in continuing smokers (p 5 0.184
for a test for interaction of FEV1%pred with smoking status).
Effect of Methacholine Reactivity
The role of methacholine reactivity in predicting changes in
lung function has been reported in detail elsewhere (23). Methacholine
reactivity was a strong determinant of the initial benefit
of smoking cessation: quitters with the greatest degree of
methacholine reactivity had the largest improvement in
FEV1%pred at Year 1. Lung function declined throughout the
study in continuing smokers and after Year 1 in sustained
quitters. In both groups, the rate of decline was strongly related
to degree of methacholine reactivity (greatest among the
most responsive).
Effect of Bronchodilator Responsiveness
Among LHS participants, the mean increase in FEV1 after
isoproterenol at baseline was 4.3 6 5.1%, or 111 6 130 ml. Despite
this modest degree of bronchodilator responsiveness,
there was a strong relationship between the degree of bronchodilator
responsiveness and change in FEV1%pred from
baseline to Year 1 both for continuing smokers and for sustained
quitters (p , 0.001; Figure 3). Bronchodilator responsiveness
was not predictive of change in FEV1%pred from
Year 1 to Year 5 except in the intermittent quitter group (results
not shown).
Effect of Age
Among quitters, the Year 1 improvement in FEV1%pred and
FEV1 were greater in the youngest quintile compared with the
oldest quintile (12.53 6 5.07 versus 11.32 6 5.77%pred; or
170.4 6 189 versus 118 6 190 ml, p , 0.02 for either comparison;
Figure 4A). Among continuing smokers, the decline in
lung function during the first year was not related to age.
From Year 1 to Year 5, older subjects who were either smokers
or intermittent smokers had a slightly more rapid annual
decline in lung function than did younger subjects in either
group (p 5 0.002 for smokers; p 5 0.032 for intermittent smokers).
This was not true among quitters (p 5 0.670; Figure 4B).
Effect of Sex
The role of sex in predicting changes in lung function will be
reported separately (Owens, G. R., A. S. Buist, J. E. Connett,
R. A. Wise, W. C. Bailey, and P. A. Lindgren, for the Lung
Health Study Research Group. 1999. Changes in smoking status
affect women more than men: results of the Lung Health
Study. In preparation.) Women who became sustained quitters
had an average improvement in Year 1 in FEV1%pred
that was 2.5 times as great as the improvement in men. In contrast,
women who continued to smoke had a proportionately
greater annual decline in lung function than men with comparable
smoking rates (21.08% pred for women versus 20.77%
pred for men). These effects were closely related to the greater
degree of methacholine reactivity observed in women and
may be related to airway geometry and baseline lung function.
Figure 2. Continuing smokers with the lowest baseline lung function had more rapid declines in FEV1% pred than those with the best lung
function at baseline (p , 0.001).
Effect of Race
In the multivariate analysis, nonwhite subjects (4.2% of the total
cohort) had a greater decline in FEV1%pred during Year 1
than did white subjects (p 5 0.024; Table 3A). There was no
difference in the rate of change in FEV1%pred between Year
1 and Year 5 (p 5 0.64).
Effect of Baseline Smoking Rate
Among sustained quitters, in both SI-P and UC groups, lung
function improved more in the first year for formerly heavy
smokers (13.33 6 6.22% pred or 196 6 227 ml for the heaviest
smoking quintile) than for light smokers (10.51 6 4.54%
pred or 216 6 148 ml for the lightest smoking quintile, p 5
0.001; Figure 5). Among continuing smokers the heaviest
smokers had a greater decline than light smokers (21.23 6
5.15% pred or 267 6 191 ml versus 20.54 6 5.49% pred or
239 6 178 ml, p 5 0.028; Figure 5). Smoking mentholated cigarettes
did not affect the rate of decline in lung function in
Year 1 or between Year 1 and Year 5 (p 5 0.229 and 0.64, respectively,
data not shown).
From Year 1 to Year 5, the predictive value of baseline smoking
rate persisted only among continuing smokers: heavier smokers
at baseline had a more rapid rate of decline in lung function
than did lighter smokers (p 5 0.016). This was not true
among sustained quitters and intermittent quitters (data not
shown).
Lack of Predictive Value of Baseline
Respiratory Symptoms
Respiratory symptoms at baseline (cough, phlegm, wheezing
of any degree, dyspnea; Table 1) were not predictive of changes
in lung function, either alone or in combination with smoking
cessation, when adjusted for age, sex, baseline lung function,
methacholine reactivity, and baseline smoking rate.
Multivariate Analysis
The results of the multivariate analysis of the changes in
FEV1%pred from baseline to Year 1 are shown in Table 3A.
The strongest predictor of lung function at Year 1 is change in
smoking status. Other significant predictors include baseline
FEV1%pred, bronchodilator responsiveness, race, methacholine
reactivity, randomization group, and age. There are nonlinear
effects of baseline FEV1%pred and bronchodilator response;
these are represented in the model by quadratic terms
for these two variables. There are also interaction effects of
both sex and methacholine reactivity with change in smoking
status.
The results of the multivariate analysis from Year 1 to Year
5 are shown in Table 3B. The greatest predictor of Year 1 to
Year 5 change is final smoking status, followed by methacholine
reactivity, age, baseline FEV1%pred, and baseline smoking
rate (Table 3B). Randomization group, bronchodilator responsiveness,
race, and sex are not significant independent
predictors. There were no nonlinear effects or interactive effects
identified. The variables included in the multivariate
equation account for 9.9% (i.e., R2 5 0.099) of the variability
in decline in FEV1%pred between Year 1 and Year 5.
DISCUSSION
The major findings of this analysis of the effects of smoking
cessation in smokers with mild-to-moderate COPD include
the following: (1) among those who quit smoking, the annual
rate of decline in FEV1 over 4 yr was half that observed among
those who continued smoking (31 versus 62 ml/yr). This rate
among quitters was comparable to published rates for decline
in FEV1 in healthy never-smokers (28); (2) in addition to
change in smoking status, the determinants of the degree of
improvement in, or stabilization of, FEV1 included baseline
lung function, baseline bronchodilator responsiveness, race,
methacholine reactivity, randomization group, and age; (3)
there was a small improvement in lung function for smokers
who quit after smoking intervention; among quitters in the SIP
group, the increase in FEV1 in the first year was 47 6 191 ml,
or 2.0 6 5.5%pred. This represents a 96-ml or 2.74% improvement
compared with continuing smokers; (4) participants with
greater airway responsiveness improved more in the first year
after smoking cessation than did those who were less responsive.
Methacholine reactivity and bronchodilator responsiveness
were both independently predictive of change in the first
year. In subsequent years, the rate of decline in lung function
was related to methacholine reactivity, but not to bronchodilator
responsiveness; (5) lower initial lung function was predictive
of greater benefit from quitting during the first year and,
to a lesser degree, during subsequent years; (6) younger quitters
benefited more than older quitters, but the effect of age
was small (i.e., the benefit of quitting was large, regardless of
age); (7) women had a proportionately larger improvement in
the first year after quitting than did men; and women who continued
to smoke had a greater loss of function in subsequent
years than did men with comparable smoking rates; (8) heavy
smokers benefited from smoking cessation more than did light
smokers. In the multivariate analysis, this effect was strongly
related to airway hyperresponsiveness; and (9) baseline respiratory
symptoms did not predict change in lung function in either
quitters or continuing smokers.
The primary objectives of the LHS were to determine the
effect of smoking cessation intervention and bronchodilator
ing-
related morbidity and mortality. The current analysis was
performed to determine the effect of smoking cessation per se
on lung function. Randomization into the LHS was according
to intervention group, not smoking status, and so conclusions
regarding pulmonary function in relation to smoking status
should be considered with caution. The small differences in
the baseline characteristics between the continuing smokers
and the sustained quitters must be noted, but do not appear to
have had an impact on the outcomes reported. The effect of
randomization group on the Year 1 improvement in lung function
is partly explained by differences in timing of smoking
cessation and amount smoked at baseline. A quitting effect of
comparable magnitude was observed among delayed quitters,
reinforcing the impression that it is likely a real phenomenon.
The effects of smoking and smoking cessation on lung function
have been addressed by many studies. Cross-sectional data
indicate lower levels of lung function in smokers, and prospective
studies have demonstrated more rapid rates of decline
among current cigarette smokers than among never-smokers.
The annual decline in FEV1 in prospective studies ranges from
19 to 52 ml/yr among nonsmokers; and from 34 to 79 ml/yr
among heavy smokers (29). Smoking cessation results in a reduced
rate of decline in lung function, which may approach
that of never-smokers. An improvement in lung function after
smoking cessation, such as that experienced by LHS participants,
has been reported by only a few studies (30, 31).
Strengths of the LHS include the prospective, interventional
design, the large number of participants, the large proportion
of women, the high rate of follow-up, the high rates of
smoking cessation, the high quality of pulmonary function data,
and the methacholine reactivity data. Because of these strengths,
the data from the LHS can better define the effects of smoking
cessation on lung function and predictors of those effects.
The results of the Lung Health Study may be applicable to
other populations of smokers, especially those with mild-tomoderate
airflow obstruction. Among smokers without airflow
obstruction, the effect of smoking cessation on lung function
would likely be smaller. The LHS intervention program is
unlikely to be reproduced in the current practice of smoking
intervention because of cost constraints; nonetheless, the effects
of actual smoking cessation, as evaluated by the current
study, should be relevant to other smoking cessation interventions.
Baseline lung function is a predictor of changes in lung
function. FEV1%pred is strongly associated with methacholine
reactivity and may serve as a partial surrogate for airway
responsiveness. Since measurement of airway responsiveness
is expensive and is often thought (wrongly) to be hazardous in
persons with compromised lung function, it is rarely performed
in patients with COPD. The LHS has shown that lung
function can predict the benefit of smoking cessation or the
harm of continued smoking for smokers with airflow obstruction.
This reinforces the utility of spirometry for identifying
smokers at risk of developing severe COPD.
Figure 3. Subjects with the greatest bronchodilator response ranked by quintiles showed the greatest decline or least improvement at Year
1 (p , 0.001 for both quitters and continuing smokers).
Figure 4. (A) Baseline to Year 1; (B) Year 1 to Year 5. The youngest quitters ranked by quintiles had the greatest initial improvement (p 5
0.014). The oldest continuing smokers had the greatest functional loss (p 5 0.0021). The benefit of smoking cessation was large for all
ages.
TABLE 3
ESTIMATED EFFECTS OF SPECIFIED INCREMENTS IN COVARIATES
AND INTERACTIONS: CHANGES IN FEV1 PERCENT PREDICTED*
Definition of abbreviations: FEV1 5 forced expiratory volume in 1 s; meth 5 methacholine; SI-P 5 smoking intervention and placebo; UC 5
usual care.
Significance for Smoking Intervention
In the LHS, smoking status was the most powerful predictor
of decline in lung function in smokers with COPD. When
smokers are counseled to quit smoking, they may rationalize
their unwillingness or inability to quit by claiming that they
are too old to benefit from quitting, that they smoke too heavily
and cannot quit, or that they have already damaged their lungs
irreparably. Similarly, in public policy, insurance payment criteria,
and health care guidelines or programs, a nihilistic attitude
exists that suggests that smoking cessation intervention is
not worthwhile for older smokers or those with established
smoking-related disease (32). The results of the LHS provide
a strong counterargument to such attitudes. Heavy smokers
stand to benefit the most if they quit and to lose the most if
they continue smoking. Older smokers benefit nearly as much,
in terms of improved rates of decline in function, as younger
smokers. Smokers with the worst lung function deteriorate
most rapidly if they continue smoking; therefore they benefit
the most from smoking cessation.
The LHS intervention program resulted in a high rate of
sustained smoking cessation among heavy smokers. This is
probably because of the intensity and duration of the program,
along with the extended use of nicotine replacement
therapy. Such intensive programs may be necessary for heavy
smokers with compromised lung function. Analyses of the
costs and benefits of such interventions are needed.
Figure 5. The heaviest smokers ranked by quintiles had the largest improvement in the first year after quitting (p 5 0.001 compared with
the lightest smoking quintile), and the largest functional loss during the first year if they continued smoking (p 5 0.028).
