Characteristics and Outcomes in Patients With
COVID-19 and Acute Ischemic Stroke
The Global COVID-19 Stroke Registry
George Ntaios , MD, MSc, PhD; Patrik Michel, MD; Georgios Georgiopoulos, MD; Yutao Guo, MD; Wencheng Li, MD;
Jing Xiong, MD; Patricia Calleja, MD; Fernando Ostos, MD; Guillermo González-Ortega, MD; Blanca Fuentes, MD, PhD;
María Alonso de Leciñana, MD, PhD; Exuperio Díez-Tejedor, MD, PhD; Sebastian García-Madrona, MD; Jaime Masjuan, MD, PhD;
Alicia DeFelipe, MD; Guillaume Turc, MD; Bruno Gonçalves, MD; Valerie Domigo, MD; Gheorghe-Andrei Dan, MD;
Roxana Vezeteu, MD; Hanne Christensen, MD; Louisa Marguerite Christensen, MD, PhD; Per Meden, MD; Lejla Hajdarevic, MD;
Angela Rodriguez-Lopez, MD; Fernando Díaz-Otero, MD; Andrés García-Pastor, MD, PhD; Antonio Gil-Nuñez, MD, PhD;
Errikos Maslias, MD; Davide Strambo, MD; David J. Werring, MD, PhD; Arvind Chandratheva, MD; Laura Benjamin, MD;
Robert Simister, MD, PhD; Richard Perry, MD; Rahma Beyrouti, MD; Pascal Jabbour, MD, PhD; Ahmad Sweid, MD;
Stavropoula Tjoumakaris, MD; Elisa Cuadrado-Godia, MD; Ana Rodríguez Campello, MD; Jaume Roquer, MD;
Tiago Moreira, MD; Michael V. Mazya, MD; Fabio Bandini, MD; Karl Matz, MD; Helle K. Iversen, MD;
Alejandra González-Duarte, MD; Cristina Tiu, MD, PhD; Julia Ferrari, MD; Milan R. Vosko, MD; Helmut J.F. Salzer, MD;
Bernd Lamprecht, MD; Martin W. Dünser, MD; Carlo W. Cereda, MD; Ángel Basilio Corredor Quintero, MD;
Eleni Korompoki, MD, PhD; Eduardo Soriano-Navarro, MD; Luis Enrique Soto-Ramírez, MD; Paulo F. Castañeda-Méndez, MD;
Daniela Bay-Sansores, MD; Antonio Arauz, MD; Vanessa Cano-Nigenda, MD; Espen Saxhaug Kristoffersen, MD, PhD;
Marjaana Tiainen, MD; Daniel Strbian, MD; Jukka Putaala, MD; Gregory Y.H. Lip, MD
ABSTRACT: Recent case-series of small size implied a pathophysiological association between coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) and severe large-vessel acute ischemic stroke. Given that severe strokes are typically associated with poor
prognosis and can be very efficiently treated with recanalization techniques, confirmation of this putative association is
urgently warranted in a large representative patient cohort to alert stroke clinicians, and inform pre- and in-hospital acute
stroke patient pathways. We pooled all consecutive patients hospitalized with laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 and acute
ischemic stroke in 28 sites from 16 countries. To assess whether stroke severity and outcomes (assessed at discharge or at
the latest assessment for those patients still hospitalized) in patients with acute ischemic stroke are different between patients
with COVID-19 and non-COVID-19, we performed 1:1 propensity score matching analyses of our COVID-19 patients with
non-COVID-19 patients registered in the Acute Stroke Registry and Analysis of Lausanne Registry between 2003 and
2019. Between January 27, 2020, and May 19, 2020, 174 patients (median age 71.2 years; 37.9% females) with COVID-19
and acute ischemic stroke were hospitalized (median of 12 patients per site). The median National Institutes of Health
Stroke Scale was 10 (interquartile range [IQR], 4–18). In the 1:1 matched sample of 336 patients with COVID-19 and non-
COVID-19, the median National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale was higher in patients with COVID-19 (10 [IQR, 4–18]
versus 6 [IQR, 3–14]), P=0.03; (odds ratio, 1.69 [95% CI, 1.08–2.65] for higher National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale
score). There were 48 (27.6%) deaths, of which 22 were attributed to COVID-19 and 26 to stroke. Among 96 survivors with
available information about disability status, 49 (51%) had severe disability at discharge. In the propensity score-matched
population (n=330), patients with COVID-19 had higher risk for severe disability (median mRS 4 [IQR, 2–6] versus 2 [IQR,
1–4], P<0.001) and death (odds ratio, 4.3 [95% CI, 2.22–8.30]) compared with patients without COVID-19. Our findings
suggest that COVID-19 associated ischemic strokes are more severe with worse functional outcome and higher mortality
than non-COVID-19 ischemic strokes.
Key Words: coronavirus, COVID-19, prognosis, propensity score, survivors

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), a viral disease
caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2, may predispose patients to arterial
thrombotic complications mediated by inflammation,
endothelial dysfunction, thrombin generation, and platelet
activation.f Three recent case-series of small size implied
a pathophysiological association between COVID-19
and severe large-vessel acute ischemic stroke (AIS).2–4
Given that severe strokes are typically associated with
poor prognosis and can be very efficiently treated with
recanalization techniques, confirmation of this putative
association is urgently warranted in a large representative
patient cohort to alert stroke clinicians and inform
pre- and in-hospital acute stroke patient pathways.
We pooled all consecutive patients hospitalized with
laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 and AIS in 28 sites from
16 countries. We excluded patients who were infected
after the onset of stroke. Nineteen (70.4%) sites were
reference hospitals for patients with COVID-19. A prespecified
form was used to register anonymized patient
data. To assess whether stroke severity (estimated by the
National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale) and outcomes
(assessed by the modified Rankin Scale, at discharge or
at the latest assessment for those patients still hospitalized)
in patients with AIS are different between patients
with and without COVID-19, we performed 1:1 propensity
score matching analyses of our COVID-19 patients
with non-COVID-19 patients registered in the Acute
Stroke Registry and Analysis of Lausanne5 between
2003 and 2019. For the propensity score matching
analysis of stroke severity, patients were matched without
replacement on a set of prespecified covariates,
including demographics (age, sex), stroke risk factors,
and comorbidities (hypertension, diabetes mellitus, atrial
fibrillation, coronary artery disease, heart failure, cancer,
previous stroke, smoking, obesity, dyslipidemia). For the
propensity score matching analysis of outcomes, the
type of intervention and main stroke symptoms (motor
symptoms, sensory symptoms, dysarthria, and aphasia)
were additionally matched (further details on statistical
methods are available in the supplementary material).
The Global COVID-19 Stroke registry was approved
by the Institutional Review Board of the co-ordinating
site (Larissa University Hospital). Informed consent was
waived as this was an observational study on pseudonymized
data. Requests to access the data set from qualified
researchers trained in human subject confidentiality
protocols may be sent to the first author.
Between January 27, 2020, and May 19, 2020, 174
patients (median age 71.2 years; 37.9% females) with
COVID-19 and AIS were hospitalized (median of 12
patients per site). There were 45 patients aged >80
years and 41 aged <64 years.
In 96% of the cases, COVID-19 was confirmed with
PCR and in the others by serology. The most prevalent
stroke risk factors and comorbidities were hypertension
(68.4%), obesity (37.4%), and diabetes mellitus
(31.03%). Previous stroke was reported in 20 (11.5%)
patients. The median delay between the initiation of
COVID-19 symptoms and stroke onset was 7 days
(interquartile range [IQR]: 2–15). The most prevalent
COVID symptoms were fever (55.2%,), cough (53.5%),
and dyspnoea (43.7%).
The main stroke symptoms were motor (67.8%), dysarthria
(46%), and sensory (42%). The median National
Institutes of Health Stroke Scale was 10 (IQR: 4–18). In
the 1:1 matched sample of 336 patients with and without
COVID-19, the median National Institutes of Health
Stroke Scale was higher in patients with COVID-19 (10
[IQR: 4–18] versus 6 [IQR: 3–14], P=0.03; odds ratio,
1.69 [95% CI, 1.08–2.65] for higher National Institutes
of Health Stroke Scale score; Figure).
The vascular territory most frequently affected was
the middle cerebral artery (in 93 out of 163 patients
with available information). In the matched database
(n=366), 132 of 168 patients with COVID-19 had
a complete diagnostic workup towards stroke cause.
Among those 132 patients, 30 (22.7%) and 10 (7.6%)
had a large-artery or a lacunar stroke, respectively. In
the non-COVID-19 matched cohort, we recorded 22
(13.1%) patients with large-artery atherosclerosis and
17 (10.2%) with lacunar stroke. Overall, we did not
find a difference in the prevalence of large-artery and
lacunar stroke between the 2 populations (nonparametric
χ2 test P=0.082).
In the overall population of the patients with COVID-
19, alteplase was administered in 34 (19.7%) of patients
and endovascular thrombectomy was performed in 21
(12.1%) patients (33 and 20 among the patients with
COVID-19who were included in the matched analysis,
respectively). The outcomes per intervention in the
matched cohort of patients with stroke with and without
COVID-19 are presented in the Data Supplement. Any
hemorrhagic transformation of the infarct was diagnosed
in 22 patients, of whom 5 had been treated with intravenous
alteplase. Malignant brain edema was present in 4
(5.1%) patients and 3 of these patients were treated with
hemicraniectomy.
Among 112 patients who had pulmonary imaging
with chest CT, 89.3% had lung opacities. Twentyseven
patients (15.5%) were intubated, 40 (23%)
were transferred to an intensive care unit, and 110
(63.2%) were discharged from the hospital. There
were 48 (27.6%) deaths, of which 22 were attributed
to COVID-19 and 26 to stroke. Among 96 survivors
with available information about disability status, 49
(51%) had severe disability at discharge. In the propensity
score matched population (n=330), patients
with COVID-19 had higher risk for severe disability
(median modified Rankin Scale 4 [IQR: 2–6] versus 2
[IQR: 1–4], P<0.001) and death (odds ratio, 4.3 [95%
CI, 2.22–8.30]) compared with patients with non-
COVID-19 (Figure).
The strengths of this analysis are the large patient
cohort, the multicentre international design, the inclusion
of all consecutive known COVID-19 AIS patients
treated in each site, and the propensity score matching
comparison with a non-COVID-19 AIS cohort. A limitation
of the study is that the propensity score match
cohort was from a single site; however, as described
in the supplemental material, our sensitivity analysis
for potential hidden bias in the matched database
confirmed the robustness of the main findings. Even
if this extra, unobserved indicator (ie, site of recruitment)
could affect the odds of a patient’s conditional
classification to the case or control group by up to
130% and in parallel was totally unrelated to all of the
variables taken into consideration (demographic characteristics,
risk factors, comorbidities, stroke symptoms,
and treatment), still our results of increased mortality
and disability in patients with COVID-19 would not
substantially change.
There are several potential explanations for the relation
between COVID-19 associated ischemic strokes
and increased stroke severity, which may co-exist. It
was proposed that viral infections may cause a direct
vasculopathic effect (endotheliopathy) or potentiate
the prothrombotic milieu via several mechanisms
including immune-mediated platelet activation, dehydration,
and infection-induced cardiac arrhythmias.6 It
is unclear whether the finding of increased severity in
COVID-19 associated ischemic strokes applies to all
ischemic stroke types or is mainly driven by an increase
in large-vessel occlusion strokes, as implied by recent
findings.2 Finally, it may be possible that the stay-athome
recommendations/orders and the general fear of
the hospital during the COVID-19 pandemic may have
prevented patients with acute stroke with smaller deficits
from presenting to the hospital, although a recent
study in Barcelona reported that initial stroke severity
was not different between patients with stroke admitted
in March 2019 and March 2020.7
The increased stroke severity at admission in COVID-
19 associated stroke patients compared with the non-
COVID-19 cohort may explain the worse outcomes. The
broad multi-system complications of COVID-19 including
acute respiratory distress syndrome, cardiac arrhythmias,
acute cardiac injury, shock, pulmonary embolism, cytokine
release syndrome and secondary infection,8 probably
contribute further to the worse outcomes including
higher mortality in these patients.
Our findings suggest that COVID-19 associated ischemic
strokes are more severe with worse functional outcome
and higher mortality than non-COVID-19 ischemic
strokes. The association between COVID-19 and severe
stroke highlights the urgent need for studies aiming to
uncover the underlying mechanisms and is relevant for
prehospital stroke awareness and in-hospital acute stroke
pathways during the current and future pandemics, since
severe strokes have typically poor prognosis and can
potentially be treated with recanalization techniques.
Figure. Matched populations of
patients with coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) from the Global
COVID-19 Stroke Registry and
patients without COVID-19 from the
Acute Stroke Registry and Analysis
of Lausanne (ASTRAL) registry.
The upper panel presents the distribution
of the modified Rankin Scale scores. The
lower panel presents the histogram and
Kernel Density Estimates of the National
Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS)
scores.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Affiliations
Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, School of Health Sciences,
University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece (G.N.). Stroke Center, Neurology
Service, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Lausanne University Hospital,
Switzerland (P.M., E.M., D. Strambo). School of Biomedical Engineering and Imaging
Sciences, King’s College, London, United Kingdom (G.G.). Department of
Cardiology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China (Y.G.). Department of
Urology (W.L.) and Department of Nephrology (J.X.), Union Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science & Technology, China. Department of
Neurology and Stroke Center, Doce de Octubre University Hospital, Instituto de
Investigación Hospital 12 de Octubre (i+12), Madrid, Spain (P.C., F.O., G.G.-O.).
Department of Neurology and Stroke Center, La Paz University Hospital, IdiPAZ
Health Research Institute, Madrid, Spain (B.F., M.A.d.L., E.D.-T.). Department of
Neurology and Stroke Centre, Ramón y Cajal University Hospital, IRYCIS Health
Research Institute, Madrid, Spain (S.G.-M., J.M., A.D.). Department of Neurology,
GHU Paris Psychiatrie et Neurosciences, Université de Paris, INSERM U1266,
and FHU Neurovasc, France (G.T., B.G., V.D.). Intensive Care Unit, Paulo Niemeyer
State Brain Institute, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (B.G.). Colentina University Hospital,
Medicine Faculty, University of Medicine “Carol Davila”-Bucharest, Romania
(G.-A.D., R.V.). Bispebjerg Hospital & University of Copenhagen, Denmark (H.C.,
L.M.C., P.M., L.H.). Vascular Neurology Section - Stroke Center, Hospital General
Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain (A.R.L., F.D.O., A.G.P., A.G.-N.).
Stroke Research Centre, Department of Brain Repair and Rehabilitation, UCL
Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom (D.J.W., A.C., L.B.,
R.S., R.P., R.B.). Department of Neurological Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University
Hospital, Philadelphia, PA (P.J., A.S., S.T.). Stroke Unit, Department of Neurology,
Hospital del Mar (E.C.-G., A.R.C., J.R.). Neurovascular Research Group, IMIMHospital
del Mar (Institut Hospital del Mar d’Investigacions Mèdiques), Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona/DCEXS-Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain
(E.C.-G., A.R.C., J.R.). Department of Clinical Neuroscience (T.M., M.V.M.) and Department
of Neurology (T.M., M.V.M.), Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
Department of Neurology, San Paolo Hospital, Savona, Italy (F.B.). Landesklinikum
Mödling, Neurologische Abteilung und Donau-Universität Krems, Zentrum
für Vaskuläre Prävention, Krems, Austria (K.M.). Stroke Centre Rigshospitalet,
Department of Neurology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University
of Copenhagen, Denmark (H.K.I.). Department of Neurology, Instituto Nacional
de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, a COVID Center, Mexico City
(A.G.-D.). Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania
(C.T.). University Emergency Hospital, Bucharest, Romania (C.T.). Department of
Neurology, Krankenhaus Barmherzige Brüder, Vienna, Austria (J.F.). Department
of Neurology 2 (M.R.V.) and Department of Pulmonary Medicine (H.J.F.S., B.L.),
Kepler University Hospital, Linz, Austria. Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive
Care Medicine, Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria (M.W.D.). Stroke
Center EOC, Neurocenter of Southern Switzerland, Lugano (C.W.C.). Department
of Neurology, Hospital Departamental Universitario del Quindío San Juan de
DiosArmenia, Colombia (Á.B.C.Q.). Department of Clinical Therapeutics, National
and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Alexandra Hospital, Greece (E.K.). Internal
Medicine, Fundación Clínica Médica Sur, Mexico City (E.S.-N., L.E.S.-R., P.F.C.-M.,
D.B.-S.). Stroke Clinic, Instituto Nacional de Neurologıa y Neurocirugıa Manuel
Velasco Suarez, Mexico City (A.A., V.C.-N.). Department of Neurology, Akershus
University Hospital, Norway (E.S.K.). Department of General Practice, HELSAM,
University of Oslo (E.S.K.). Department of Neurology, Helsinki University Hospital,
Finland (M.T., D. Strbian, J.P.). Liverpool Centre for Cardiovascular Science,
University of Liverpool and Liverpool Heart & Chest Hospital, United Kingdom
(G.Y.H.L.). Aalborg Thrombosis Research Unit, Department of Clinical Medicine,
Aalborg University, Denmark (G.Y.H.L.).
Sources of Funding
None.
Disclosures
Dr Michel reports grants from Swiss National Science Foundation, grants
from Swiss Heart Foundation, during the conduct of the study; grants from
European Thrombosis Investigator-Initiated Research Program (Bristol-Myers
Squibb/Pfizer), personal fees from Medtronic (used for research), outside the
submitted work. Dr Gonçalves reports grants from Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento
de Pessoal de Nível Superior—Brasil outside the submitted work.
Dr Dan reports personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, personal fees from
Bayer, and personal fees from Pfizer outside the submitted work. Dr Strambo
reports grants from Swiss Heart Foundation and grants from University of
Lausanne outside the submitted work. Dr Werring reports personal fees from
Bayer, personal fees from Alnylam, and personal fees from Portola outside
the submitted work. Dr Simister is part funded by the UCLH/UCL Biomedical
Research Centre. Dr Benjamin reports grants from GlaxoSmithKline outside
the submitted work. Dr Jabbour reports grants from Medtronic, other from
Microvention, and other from Balt outside the submitted work. Dr Korompoki
reports personal fees from Pfizer, nonfinancial support from Bayer, and personal
fees from Amgen outside the submitted work. Dr Lip reports other from
Consultant for Bayer/Janssen, Bristol-Myers Squibb/Pfizer, Medtronic, Boehringer
Ingelheim, Novartis, Verseon, and Daiichi-Sankyo. Speaker for Bayer,
Bristol-Myers Squibb/Pfizer, Medtronic, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Daiichi-
Sankyo. The other authors report no conflicts.
