Founder’s Award, 25th Annual Meeting of the Society for
Biomaterials, Providence, RI, April 28–May 2, 1999
Tissue Heart Valves: Current Challenges and Future
Research Perspectives
Frederick J. Schoen,1 Robert J. Levy2
1Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 75 Francis Street,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115
2Abramson Pediatric Research Center, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104

Abstract: Substitute heart valves composed of human or
animal tissues have been used since the early 1960s, when
aortic valves obtained fresh from human cadavers were
transplanted to other individuals as allografts. Today, tissue
valves are used in 40% or more of valve replacements worldwide,
predominantly as stented porcine aortic valves (PAV)
and bovine pericardial valves (BPV) preserved by glutaraldehyde
(GLUT) (collectively termed bioprostheses). The
principal disadvantage of tissue valves is progressive calcific
and noncalcific deterioration, limiting durability. Native
heart valves (typified by the aortic valve) are cellular and
layered, with regional specializations of the extracellular
matrix (ECM). These elements facilitate marked repetitive
changes in shape and dimension throughout the cardiac
cycle, effective stress transfer to the adjacent aortic wall, and
ongoing repair of injury incurred during normal function.
Although GLUT bioprostheses mimic natural aortic valve
structure (a) their cells are nonviable and thereby incapable
of normal turnover or remodeling ECM proteins; (b) their
cuspal microstructure is locked into a configuration which is
at best characteristic of one phase of the cardiac cycle (usually
diastole); and (c) their mechanical properties are markedly
different from those of natural aortic valve cusps. Consequently,
tissue valves suffer a high rate of progressive and
age-dependent structural valve deterioration resulting in
stenosis or regurgitation (>50% of PAV overall fail within
10–15 years; the failure rate is nearly 100% in 5 years in those
<35 years old but only 10% in 10 years in those >65). Two
distinct processes—intrinsic calcification and noncalcific
degradation of the ECM—account for structural valve deterioration.
Calcification is a direct consequence of the inability
of the nonviable cells of the GLUT-preserved tissue to
maintain normally low intracellular calcium. Consequently,
nucleation of calcium-phosphate crystals occurs at the phospholipid-
rich membranes and their remnants. Collagen and
elastin also calcify. Tissue valve mineralization has complex
host, implant, and mechanical determinants. Noncalcific
degradation in the absence of physiological repair mechanisms
of the valvular structural matrix is increasingly being
appreciated as a critical yet independent mechanism of
valve deterioration. These degradation mechanisms are
largely rationalized on the basis of the changes to natural
valves when they are fabricated into a tissue valve (mentioned
above), and the subsequent interactions with the
physiologic environment that are induced following implantation.
The “Holy Grail” is a nonobstructive, nonthrombogenic
tissue valve which will last the lifetime of the patient
(and potentially grow in maturing recipients). There is considerable
activity in basic research, industrial development,
and clinical investigation to improve tissue valves. Particularly
exciting in concept, yet early in practice is tissue engineering,
a technique in which an anatomically appropriate
construct containing cells seeded on a resorbable scaffold is
fabricated in vitro, then implanted. Remodeling in vivo,
stimulated and guided by appropriate biological signals incorporated
into the construct, is intended to recapitulate
normal functional architecture. © 1999 John Wiley & Sons,
Inc. J Biomed Mater Res, 47, 439–465, 1999.

In the past 4 decades, countless models of substitute
heart valves have been developed and investigated,
and the technology of their design and manufacture
has progressively improved. Nevertheless, an ideal
valve replacement device has not been achieved. The
desirable characteristics of a heart valve substitute,
originally enumerated by Harken1 as the “Ten Commandments
of Satisfactory Prosthetic Aortic Valves,”
are summarized in modified form in Table I.
Heart valve substitutes are of two principal types:
mechanical prosthetic valves with components manufactured
of nonbiologic material (e.g., polymer, metal,
carbon) or tissue valves which are constructed, at least
in part, of either human or animal tissue.2–6 At least
60,000 substitute valves are implanted in the United
States and 170,000 worldwide each year, of which we
presently estimate that approximately 60% are mechanical
and 40% are tissue, suggesting a shift toward
increasingly greater usage of tissue valves over the
past several years.7
Tissue valves have been used since the early 1960s,
when aortic valves obtained fresh from human cadavers
were transplanted to other individuals.8,9 Less
than a decade later, chemically preserved stentmounted
tissue bioprosthetic valves (termed “bioprostheses”)
were first implanted.10 (The term “bioprosthesis”
is usually used to denote a valve which is
chemically treated, mounted on a stent, or both.) Today,
stented glutaraldehyde-preserved porcine aortic
valves and bovine pericardial bioprosthetic valves are
used extensively; stentless valves (to be discussed
later) may be used more widely in the future. Although
tissue valve substitutes have certain advantages
over mechanical valves (see below), their durability
is limited.2–7 Our objective in this review is to
summarize and critically evaluate the current and future
challenges and directions in research and development
of tissue heart valves, emphasizing key evolving
concepts, emerging scientific data, and new technology
particularly related to the quality of the tissue
itself.
TABLE I
Desirable Characteristics of a Heart Valve Substitute
Nonobstructive
Closure is prompt and complete
Nonthrombogenic
Infection resistant
Chemically inert and nonhemolytic (does not damage blood
elements)
Durable for extended intervals
Easily and permanently inserted into an appropriate
physiologic site, preferably orthotopic
Interface between prosthesis and patient heals appropriately
Not annoying to the patient (noise free)
ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF
MECHANICAL AND TISSUE VALVES
Within 10 years postoperatively, prosthesisassociated
problems necessitate reoperation or cause
death in at least 50–60% of patients with substitute
valves.11,12 The rate of problems overall is similar for
mechanical prostheses and bioprostheses. Four categories
of valve-related complications predominate:
(a) thromboembolism, thrombosis, and anticoagulation-
related hemorrhage; (b) prosthetic valve endocarditis
(infection); (c) structural dysfunction (i.e., failure
or degeneration of the prosthesis biomaterials; and (d)
nonstructural dysfunction (i.e., a diverse array of complications
which includes tissue overgrowth, paravalvular
leak, hemolysis, and other extrinsic interactions
of host tissues with a valve).2–7,11–14
Although composite rates of valve-related complications
are similar for mechanical prostheses and bioprostheses,
the frequency and nature of specific valverelated
complications can vary with the prosthesis
type, model, site of implantation, and patient characteristics
(such as age and activity level).4,13,14 In particular,
mechanical and tissue valves differ in their
major causes of failure.
Specifically, mechanical prosthetic valves are associated
with substantial risk of systemic thromboemboli
and thrombotic occlusion, largely owing to nonphysiologic
surfaces and flow abnormalities created
by one or more rigid occluders.2–7,11–13,15 To minimize
this risk, chronic anticoagulation therapy is required
in all mechanical valve recipients. However, systemic
anticoagulation renders patients vulnerable to potentially
serious hemorrhagic complications.15 Thus, the
combined risk of thromboembolic complications and
hemorrhage constitutes the principal disadvantage of
mechanical prosthetic valves. Nevertheless, contemporary
mechanical prostheses typically have high
structural reliability.
In contrast to mechanical valves, tissue valves maintain
a low rate of thromboembolism without anticoagulation.
2–7,11–13 Their central pattern of flow approximates
that of the natural heart valves and their
cusps are composed of valvular or nonvalvular animal
or human tissue, which is typically more thromboresistant
than synthetic materials. Indeed, tissue valve
recipients (who are generally not anticoagulated) suffer
thromboembolism at approximately the same rate
as fully anticoagulated mechanical valve recipients.2
However, valve failure with structural dysfunction
owing to progressive tissue deterioration (including
calcification and noncalcific damage) is a serious disadvantage
which undermines the attractiveness of tissue
valve substitutes.2–7,11–13 Other important complications,
including valve infection (prosthetic valve endocarditis)
and nonstructural dysfunction, affect both
tissue and mechanical valves nearly equally.
CONTEMPORARY TISSUE VALVES
Most commercially produced tissue valves are
mounted on and supported by a metal or plastic stent,
typically with three posts (called struts) and surrounded
by a sewing cuff at the base. Stents vary in
structural design, flexibility, and composition among
models. Both stent and sewing cuff facilitate surgical
implantation with secure fixation and permit valve
use in either the semilunar (aortic/pulmonary) or
atrioventricular (mitral/tricuspid) valve sites. In contrast,
nonstented porcine aortic valves, aortic (or pulmonary)
valve allografts and pulmonary autografts
(each discussed later) are sewn directly into the surgically
prepared aortic valve site; each is more difficult
to insert than a stented valve and each configuration
does not readily permit mitral (or tricuspid) valve replacement.
Thus, bioprostheses are hybrid structures,
partly biologic (i.e., the cuspal tissue) and partly synthetic
[i.e., the stent (often covered by fabric) and sewing
ring].
The chemical, mechanical, and morphologic features
before and after insertion, and the clinical success
and specific failure modes of cardiac valvular tissue
grafts depend primarily on the type, source, preservation,
and handling of the tissue, and the method
of tissue attachment and support. The immunological
relationship between donor and recipient tissue varies.
Valvular tissue can be transplanted (a) across species
(xenografts, also called heterografts and including
bioprostheses derived from porcine aortic valve or bovine
pericardium), (b) between persons [allografts,
also called homografts and including aortic (or pulmonary)
valves with associated aorta (or pulmonary
artery)], or (c) from one site to another within an individual
(autograft, composed of pericardium, or the
patient’s pulmonary valve transplanted to the aortic
root). Other diverse tissues including human fascia
lata16 and dura mater17 have been used to fabricate
valves. Clinically used xenograft tissue is usually preserved
by chemical crosslinking with aldehydes. Allografts
are used either fresh, with or without antibiotic
treatment, or cryopreserved (see later). Generic
tissue valve types in wide clinical use are summarized
in Table II.
The most frequently used generic tissue valve is the
glutaraldehyde-preserved pig aortic valve mounted
on a cloth-covered stent (porcine aortic bioprosthetic
valve). Two commercially available products dominate;
they differ in configuration, glutaraldehyde pretreatment
concentration [0.2% for the Hancockt
(Medtronic Heart Valves, Santa Ana, CA) valve and
0.6% for the Carpentier-Edwards (Baxter Cardiovascular,
Santa Ana, CA)], and stent composition [polyacetal
(Delrin), and Elgiloy metal alloy, respectively].
The aortic valve of a normal pig (and some other animals
but not human) has an extension of cardiac
muscle from the ventricular septum into the right
coronary cusp. This excess tissue can inhibit cuspal
mobility and valve opening as well as become the site
of calcific deposits. Design modifications have attempted
to negate this effect.18
TABLE II
Generic Tissue Heart Valves Widely Used and/or
Currently Approved by the U.S. FDA
Xenograft/heterograft
Glutaraldehyde-pretreated stented porcine aortic valve
Glutaraldehyde-pretreated nonstented porcine aortic valve
Glutaraldehyde-pretreated bovine pericardial valve
Allograft/homograft
Cryopreserved aortic allograft valve
Autograft
Pulmonary valve to aortic valve transplant (Ross
procedure)
STRUCTURE–FUNCTION CORRELATIONS IN
TISSUE VALVES
Natural heart valves are remarkably adapted to allow
unidirectional and nonobstructed passage of
blood without regurgitation, trauma to molecular or
formed blood elements, thromboembolism, or excessive
stress concentrations in the cuspal/leaflet or supporting
tissue. Healthy valves are biologically dynamic
structures, capable of considerable functional
remodeling and repair of injury caused by large repetitive
deformations.
Sophisticated prospective development of tissue
valve substitutes depends on an understanding of the
fundamental mechanisms limiting the durability of
previous and current tissue valves. This in turn necessitates
an understanding of the functional structure of
the natural aortic valve (“gold standard”), the biology
of its cells and extracellular matrix, and the changes
which occur in tissue during fabrication and following
implantation of a prosthesis. Key aspects are described
below; future progress necessitates that these crucial
areas are subjects of ongoing research.
The natural aortic valve
Most extensively studied, most frequently diseased,
and most widely transplanted, the aortic valve provides
a useful paradigm by which to illustrate the key
concepts which describe the functional adaptation of
normal valvular architecture. Aortic valve cusps open
against the aortic wall during ventricular systole; they
close rapidly and completely under minimal reverse
pressure, stretching to maintain full competency
throughout diastole. During these movements, the
cusps routinely withstand large cyclical deformations
(with changes in area as high as 50%). Moreover, despite
the pressure differential across the closed valve
which induces a large load on the cusps, cuspal prolapse
is prevented by substantial coaptation (i.e., contact
of adjacent cusps, up to 40% of their surfaces).
The structural and biomechanical features of the
aortic valve are illustrated in Figure 1. Heart valves
have a layered, complex architecture and highly specialized,
functionally adapted cells and extracellular
matrix (ECM).19–24 These elements accommodate extraordinary
and repetitive changes in shape and dimension
throughout the cardiac cycle, provide effective
stress transfer to the annulus and adjacent aortic
wall, and mediate ongoing repair and remodeling.
Two general types of cells (and likely subsets of each)
are present: a covering layer of endothelium (as lines
the entire cardiovascular system) and interstitial cells
with features of both smooth-muscle cells and fibroblasts.
Interstitial (and perhaps endothelial) cells synthesize,
remodel, and replenish the local connective
tissue matrix.23,25–28 Each of the three well-defined tissue
layers is enriched in a different and specific ECM
component (Table III): (a) the ventricularis, below the
inflow surface, predominantly collagenous with radially
aligned elastic fibers; (b) the centrally located
spongiosa, composed of loosely arranged collagen and
abundant glycosoaminoglycans (GAGs); and (c) the
fibrosa, below the outflow surface, composed predominantly
of circumferentially aligned, macroscopically
crimped, densely packed collagen fibers, largely
arranged parallel to the cuspal free edge. Blood vessels
are sparse beyond the most proximal portions of normal
aortic valve cusps, since the thin cusps are adequately
perfused by the blood bathing them.
Within these cuspal layers, the architectural elements
are arranged in a nonrandom orientation, leading
to properties which are highly anisotropic (i.e., not
the same in all directions). Moreover, several structural
features enable cusps to be extremely soft and
pliable when unloaded (i.e., contracted) but virtually
inextensible when back pressure is applied (i.e.,
stretched). These include: (a) gross corrugations of the
fibrosa, which produce a visible surface rippling in
systole but disappear during diastole; (b) an array of
collagen cords in the fibrosa which radiate primarily
from the commissures and confer strength; and (c)
crimp (pleats) of the collagen fibers.23,24 The fiber architecture,
which confers a much higher tissue compliance
in the radial direction (perpendicular to the
free cuspal edge) than that in the circumferential direction,
is quite complex. This specialized and fractal
collagenous structure of the aortic valve can be predicted
quite accurately through the use of a computational
technique which uses the hemodynamic stress
state as input data.29 During closure, corrugations and
crimp expand perpendicular to the cuspal free margin
(i.e., radial direction); these rearrangements are accomplished
by fiber rearrangements, and permit initial
increase in dimension with minimal stress. As emphasized 
by the biomechanical model in Figure 1(C),
the stiffening induced by fully extended collagen
crimp, flattened corrugations, and taut collagen cords
prevents exaggerated sag of the cusp centers when the
valve is shut, thereby preserving maximum coaptation
(i.e., preventing cuspal prolapse). The elastin of the
ventricularis expands when the cusps stretch to enlarge
the coaptation area, but recoils to make the cusp
smaller in the open phase.23,30,31 Shear stresses caused
by the differential movement of the layers and the
shock of valve closure are dissipated in the spongiosa,
whose hydrophilic GAGs readily absorb water, swell
to form a gel and resist compression forces.
Figure 1. Structural and biomechanical features of the aortic
valve. (A) Histologic cross section of porcine valve cusp
showing the three major layers and nondistended configuration.
approximately lower one-third ventricularis; approximately
middle third spongiosa; approximately top
third fibrosa; el = elastin; outflow surface at top. (B) Schematic
representation of cuspal configuration and architecture
of collagen and elastin in systole and diastole. (C) Schematic
representation of biomechanical cooperativity between
elastin and collagen during valve motion. During
opening, elastin extends at minimal load during extension of
collagen crimp and corrugations. Near full closure, when the
collagen has fully unfolded, the load-bearing element shifts
from elastin to collagen, and stress rises steadily while coaptation
is maintained. In systole, elastin restores the contracted
configuration of the cusp. (A) Verhoff van Giesen
stain for elastin, original magnification. (B) Modified by permission
from Schoen FJ. In: Silver MD, editor. Cardiovascular
pathology, 2nd ed. Churchill Livingstone; 1991. p 1547–
1605. (A–C) Reproduced by permission from Schoen FJ. J
Heart Valve Dis 1997;6:1–6.
TABLE III
Extracellular Matrix Heterogeneity in Layers of the Aortic Valve
Tissue changes induced by preservation,
fabrication, and following implantation of
a bioprosthesis
The changes induced by preservation, manufacture,
and following implantation of a bioprosthesis are
summarized in Table IV. Although bioprostheses
mimic some features typical of aortic valve structure,
the cusps and configurations of a contemporary bioprosthesis
following chemical pretreatment and manipulation
during manufacture differ in many respects
from those of a native valve.21,23,24 Indeed, the
pathologic changes in bioprosthetic valves are to a
large extent rationalized on the basis of these differences.
Several alterations of the tissue which occur
during valve fabrication and manufacture underly the
pathological changes which occur following implantation
and which may lead to failure: (a) The cusp–
blood interface is subendothelial connective tissue devoid
of endothelial cells. (b) The microstructure is
fixed or locked in a static geometry characteristic of
one phase of the cardiac cycle, with altered mechanical
properties; the normal functional cyclical rearrangements
cannot occur. (c) The interstitial cells are made
nonviable by crosslinking; without viable interstitial
cells, bioprostheses have no synthetic or renewal
mechanism to replace collagen and other matrix components
degraded by mechanical damage proteolysis.
(d) Crosslinked cellular debris, collagen, and elastin
can serve as foci for calcification; natural inhibitors to
mineralization may be diminished or unavailable.
These and other chemical, mechanical, and structural
changes which accrue from valve fabrication and subsequent
function are summarized in Figure 2 and discussed
in detail below and in following sections.
Chemical considerations
Preservation by chemical crosslinking inhibits autolysis,
enhances material stability, allows a prolonged
shelf-life, and permits a surgeon to have valves of
various sizes readily available for implantation. Preservation
also diminishes antigenicity while maintaining
both thromboresistance and antimicrobial sterility.
TABLE IV
Changes in Bioprosthetic Tissue which can be Induced
by Fixation, Fabrication, and Implantation
Following fixation and fabrication
Crosslinking of proteins
Locking of structure at one phase of cardiac cycle
Loss of endothelium (porcine valve) or mesothelium
(pericardium)
Loss of interstitial cell viability
Interstitial cell degeneration, with fragmentation of cell
membranes, vacuolization and cytoplasmic disruption
Loss of collagen waviness
Loosening of collagen bundles
Loss of amorphous extracellular matrix
Loss of compliance (with resultant stiffening)
Following implantation
Deposition of platelets and fibrin
Superficial or deep mononuclear inflammatory cells
Endothelialization (incomplete)
Pannus overgrowth
Fluid insudation
Superficial collagen bundle fragmentation
Generalized architectural homogenization and loss of
staining
Delamination
Mechanical fatigue damage
Abrasion
Calcification
Cuspal stretching/sagging
Intracuspal hematomas
Infiltration of lipid and amyloid
Colonization by infectious organisms
Cuspal destruction by infection
Figure 2. Critical porcine valve structural alterations induced by preservation and fabrication into a bioprosthesis. Scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) appearance of (A) fresh porcine valve and (B) porcine bioprosthesis before implantation. Confluent
endothelial layer present in fresh porcine aortic valve is entirely lost in the fabricated valve. The higher-power
photomicrograph of the surface of the fabricated valve shown in (B) illustrates the rough fibrillar basement membrane
forming the blood-contacting surface of a commercially produced valve. (A) Original magnification ×1000; (B) original
magnification ×3800; bar in (A) = 10 mm; bar in (B) = 5 mm. (C,D) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of deep portions
of valve illustrating degrees of cellular preservation and collagen waviness. (C) Freshly fixed porcine aortic valve, with
morphologically normal cell, wavy collagen, and close apposition of cell to fibrillar and amorphous extracellular matrix.
Fabricated valve (high pressure–fixed) has cellular autolysis and empty space between cells and collagen. Moreover, the
collagen is flat in the high pressure–fixed valve illustrated in (D) but wavy in the fresh aortic valve shown in (C). (C,D)
Original magnification ×8000; bars in (C,D) = 1 mm. Reproduced by permission from Flomenbaum MA, Schoen FJ. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg 1993;105:154–164.
Techniques for preservation of tissue valves have included
fixation with aldehydes and other chemical
preservation [b-propriolactone, ethylene oxide, glycerine,
and photooxidation (see later)], b-irradiation,
and lyophilization.4,5,13,17,32
Glutaraldehyde (1,5-pentanedialdehyde;
CHO[CH2]3CHO) is the most frequently used chemical
preservative for bioprosthetic tissue.33,34 Forming
complex, degradation-resistant, Schiff base– and pyridinium
salt–derived crosslinks between protein molecules
of many types, glutaraldehyde efficiently
crosslinks collagen, the most abundant structural protein
of valves. In contrast, the monoaldehyde formaldehyde
induces less stable methylene-based protein
crosslinks. Consequently, formaldehyde-pretreated
bioprostheses used in the early days of tissue valve
replacement frequently developed premature material
failure.35,36 The antibacterial and antifungal efficacy of
low concentrations of glutaraldehyde is poor (especially
against spores, as exemplified by a cohort of
tissue valves over a decade ago which were contaminated
with Myobacterium chelonei).37 Therefore, adjunctive
sterilization procedures are necessary (e.g., alcoholic
glutaraldehyde solutions).
Mechanical considerations
The functional/mechanical characteristics of porcine
aortic valve and other tissues used in bioprostheses
are modified by glutaraldehyde crosslinking procedures,
and the stent constrains cuspal dynamics.
Fixation prevents the dynamic microstructural rearrangements
that accommodate normal valve function,
and glutaraldehyde-fixed aortic valve cusps are less
compliant than fresh tissue.23,24,38–40 However, the
specific changes are dependent on the fixation techniques
employed, particularly related to the transvalvular
pressure gradient present during crosslinking.
23,24,38–43 When the aortic valve is preloaded by a
back pressure during crosslinking (the normal diastolic
pressure of 80 mm Hg was used in first-generation
porcine valves), the collagen crimp and corrugations
are preloaded, elongated, and locked into a geometric
configuration similar to that of a closed valve (see Fig.
6F,G). Functional stresses must be absorbed by the
noncompliant collagen fibers.23,24,38,44 Moreover, the
inability to accommodate the natural tendency for the
fibrosa to undergo compression during opening may
induce buckling in a fixed valve. Thus, porcine valve
cusps fixed under load and bovine pericardial cusps
are relatively stiff and inflexible; they do not open
smoothly, but rather bend in a series of kinks. Subsequent
cycles induce substantial and repetitive localized
mechanical stresses, thereby accentuating tissue
fatigue (see later).44–46
Some bioprostheses are prepared using a lowpressure
fixation technique in which there is a reduced
gradient across the valve during fixation. However,
fixation pressure as low as 2–4 mm Hg is sufficient to
straighten corrugations and crimp and reduce radial
and circumferential compliance.24,38,40–43 Some data
suggest that the mechanical properties of cusps are
improved when fixation occurs without any back
pressure at all (i.e., “zero pressure” differential fixation),
thereby retaining full corrugation and crimp geometry.
However, although the compliance of cusps
fixed at zero pressure as measured in vitro is improved,
47,48 a resultant effect on valve durability in
vivo has not yet been demonstrated. Glutaraldehyde
pretreatment done while the valve undergoes cycles of
opening and closing (“dynamic” fixation) also yields
superior in vitro mechanical properties,49 but such
valves have not been studied in vivo.
Structural considerations
Detailed descriptions of the microscopic architecture
and the tissue histology of porcine aortic valve
and bovine pericardial bioprostheses are available.
13,21,50–52
Owing to autolysis, chemical treatment, and physical
changes incurred during fabrication, bioprosthetic
valves show several histologic differences from
healthy native tissue comprising valve or pericardium.
These include (at the light-microscopic level),
flattening of the cuspal corrugations, and loss of
surface endothelium or mesothelium (aortic valve or
pericardial bioprostheses, respectively), autolytic
disruption of porcine or bovine interstitial cells,
collagen bundle loosening, and possibly loss of
GAGs.21,23,41–43,51 Moreover, and very importantly, the
valvular interstitial cells lose their viability during glutaraldehyde
pretreatment. The quality of their structural
preservation is especially poor, as revealed by
transmission electron microscopy, reflecting an interval
between harvest and glutaraldehyde pretreatment
of typically at least 24–36 h.21,42
Following implantation, pathologic changes occur
in all types of bioprostheses to a variable degree. The
cuspal surfaces become variably covered by fibrin,
platelets, monocytes/macrophages, and occasionally
multinucleated giant cells.21,51–53 Proteins with other
constituents of plasma and often erythrocytes penetrate
into the cusps (fluid insudation and cuspal hematoma,
respectively). As we will discuss later, both
the imbibed fluid mass and products secreted by the
inflammatory cells may damage the collagenous valve
skeleton. Moreover, especially large accumulations of
blood can stiffen the cusps and possibly provide
nucleation sites for mineralization.54
Valve function in vivo also gradually results in generalized
architectural homogenization with connective
tissue disruption, loss of staining of interstitial cell nuclei,
and lipid accumulation.21,51,52,55 These changes
are accentuated near cuspal tears and other defects.
Although mineralization, collagen degeneration, and
possibly GAG depletion contribute to valve failure
(see later), to what extent the other nonspecific pathologic
processes mentioned above contribute to late
failure modes is uncertain.
The valve sewing cuff and basal regions of the cusps
become variably covered by a fibrous sheath of host
origin (pannus), which, when excessive, can lead to
orifice obstruction or cusp immobilization. Reendothelialization
of bioprosthetic valves is highly variable
and remains incomplete and limited to the basal attachments,
even years after implantation.56 The prolonged
cytotoxicity of glutaraldehyde-fixed tissue has
been suggested as a factor inhibiting coverage by endothelium.
57 Neutralization of reactive glutaraldehyde
in bioprosthetic tissues by treatment with Lglutamic
acid or other amino compounds reduces calcification
and cytotoxicity and enhances in vitro
endothelialization.58–60 Although it is reasonable to
hypothesize that endothelialization of a bioprosthetic
valve might decrease its propensity toward thrombosis,
infection, fluid or blood insudation, or calcific or
noncalcific degeneration, we are unaware of evidence
that pre- or postimplantation endothelialization benefits
performance.
Comparison of porcine aortic and bovine
pericardial valves
Pericardial bioprosthetic valves have cusps composed
of glutaraldehyde-treated parietal pericardium
(usually of bovine origin) attached to a frame. Without
inherent anatomic constraints, innovative designs are
feasible, and both unicuspid and bicuspid pericardial
valves have been investigated.61,62
The structure and composition of bovine pericardium
and porcine aortic valve cusp are different.51
Pericardial tissue collagen is not as compact as that of
porcine valve fibrosa. Bovine pericardial collagen is
almost entirely type I,63 whereas porcine valve contains
a mixture of type I and type III collagens.64 Parietal
pericardium has (a) a smooth serosal layer, originally
covered by mesothelial cells; (b) fibrosa (almost
the entire thickness), which contains collagen, elastic
fibers, nerves, blood vessels, and lymphatics; and (c)
rough epipericardial connective tissue, having loosely
arranged collagen and elastic fibers.65,66 Thus, one surface
of valve pericardium is smooth (that which previously
faced the pericardial space). The other is the
rough external surface from which blood and fat were
dissected away. Pericardial valves are typically fabricated
with the rough side toward the inflow, to keep
this surface well washed and thereby minimize the
possibility of thrombosis.
With collagen fibrils variably oriented in the tissue
plane, pericardium has a structure which is not naturally
adapted to valve function.51 In contrast to the
complex, highly oriented connective tissue array of an
aortic valve which facilitates stress transfer from the
cusps to the aortic wall, the pericardium concentrates
cuspal stresses at the commissures of a pericardial bioprosthetic
valve.
Thus, bovine pericardial bioprostheses differ from
porcine bioprostheses in several important respects.51
First, as indicated above, pericardial tissue and aortic
valve cusps differ in both architecture and properties.
Moreover, in contrast to porcine aortic valve cusps
whose natural attachments to the supporting aortic
wall are preserved, pericardial bioprosthetic valve
cusps are composed of pieces of tissue that are artificially
trimmed and attached to a stent. Finally, the
collagen bundles at the previously dissected and cut
surfaces (i.e., inflow surface and free cuspal edge) generated
during pericardial tissue procurement, dissection,
and valve fabrication tend to splay during function,
allowing host cells and fluid to readily enter the
tissue.
CAUSES AND MECHANISMS OF TISSUE
VALVE FAILURE
The major disadvantage of tissue valves is progressive
structural valve deterioration eventuating in stenosis
or regurgitation.2–7,13,51 Usually necessitating reoperation,
valve failure can ultimately become fatal if
not expeditiously managed. The challenges are well
illustrated by detailed examination of the calcific and
noncalcific failure modes and mechanisms of porcine
aortic and bovine pericardial valves.
Porcine aortic valves
The degradation mechanisms of bioprosthetic
valves are progressive and the rate of failure is highly
time dependent.4,5,11–13,51,52,55,67–69 Less than 1% of
porcine aortic valve bioprostheses implanted #5 years
in adults suffer structural dysfunction. However, 20–
30% become dysfunctional within 10 years and more
than 50% fail owing to degeneration within 12–15
years postoperatively.11–13,51,67–69 The risk of structural
failure is strongly age dependent, with individuals
<35 years of age and especially children and adolescents
having the highest rate.67–69 Nearly uniform
failure occurs by 5 years in those <35 years old but
only 10% fail in 10 years in those >65. Thus, bioprosthetic
valves are attractive in the elderly, who have an
especially high risk of anticoagulant-related hemorrhage.
70 The failure rate is identical for Hancock and
Carpentier-Edwards porcine valves.71 Interestingly,
porcine valves in the mitral position do not fare as
well as aortic replacement valves, a discrepancy usually
considered a result of the higher closing pressure
in the mitral position.67–69
Calcification makes a major contribution to failure4,5,13,51,52,55,72–
74 (Fig. 3). The extent of calcification
of surgically removed failed bioprosthetic valves varies
widely among patients after long-term implantation;
for 32 excised porcine bioprostheses functioning
for 36 to 156 months (mean 87), we measured mean
113 mg/mg calcium, maximal approximately 200–
250.72 Inexplicably, some (but an unknown fraction of)
bioprostheses accumulate minimal or no calcific deposits
after implantation for 10 years or longer.
Approximately three fourths of porcine valve degenerative
failures manifest as regurgitation through
tears in calcified cusps; pure stenosis due to calcific
cuspal stiffening and cuspal tears or perforations unrelated
to calcification occur less frequently (approximately
10–15% each).13,51,73,74 Rarely, calcific deposits
in bioprosthetic valves fragment and embolize. Valvular
insufficiency in porcine valves may also be caused
by commissural region dehiscence,76 in which the aortic
wall and associated commissure separate from the
strut and collapse toward the center of the valve orifice.
Bovine pericardial valves
Pericardial bioprostheses also fail by calcific and
noncalcific deterioration.4,5,13,51,77–82 Design considerations
ations appear to be critical in noncalcific failure. With
first-generation bovine pericardial bioprostheses,
which had tissue mounted on the outside of the stent
(Ionescu-Shiley, Mitroflow, and Hancock), failure was
most frequently caused by noncalcific cuspal perforations
and tears. The tears in pericardial valves most
frequently occur along the attachment points of cusps
and are frequently related to specific features of valve
design, especially the mechanism of retaining pieces
of tissue closely apposed at a commissure.77–82 The continuous
trauma of tissue against bare Dacron cloth on
the supports or frame can cause abrasion, manifested
as focal roughening or regional tapering of the tissue
cross section with attrition of collagen bundles.79,82 In
the original Ionescu-Shiley design, cuspal perforations
and tears were frequently associated with a commissural
suture (“alignment stitch”), which held cusps in
apposition near their free edge and adjacent to the
stent post.77,78,82
Contemporary pericardial valve designs have the
tissue suspended from the inside of a flexible, lowprofile
stent. These valves (e.g., Carpentier-Edwards
Perimountt, Baxter Healthcare Corporation, Edwards
Cardiovascular Division, Santa Ana, CA) appear to
have performance and durability superior to those of
previous pericardial valves,83–85 but their ultimate
mode of failure is similar to that of earlier pericardial
valves (Jack Butany, personal communication). A
similar design but using tissue processed by a novel
preservation technique (Carbomedics PhotoFixt, Sulzer
Carbomedics, Austin, TX) suffered a high rate of
abrasion-related failure, apparently resulting from different
mechanical properties (i.e., higher compliance)
of the tissue.86
Figure 3. Clinical bioprosthetic valve failure. (A) Calcium concentration of several cohorts of removed porcine valves,
measured by atomic absorption spectroscopy, plotted against duration of function. Short-term, n = 5; nondeteriorated, n = 14;
calcific degeneration, n = 31; accompanying failed valve, n = 2. Primary tissue failure of bioprostheses. (B) Gross photograph
of explanted porcine bioprosthetic valve which failed by calcification and cuspal tearing. (C) Radiograph of valve specimen
illustrated in (B). (A) Reproduced by permission from Schoen FJ, et al. Circulation 1987;76:1061–1066. (B,C) Reproduced by
permission from Schoen FJ, Hobson CE. Hum Pathol 1985;16:549–559.
Pathology and pathobiology of tissue heart valve
deterioration: Calcification and matrix deterioration
The major cause of bioprosthetic valve dysfunction is
deterioration of the cuspal tissue.
Two distinct yet potentially synergistic processes are
causal: (a) calcification and (b) noncalcific degradation
with ultimate failure of the connective tissue matrix
(Fig. 4). To a large extent, these processes are believed
to be potentiated by the functional effects of the critical
structural changes which occur on fabrication of a
bioprosthesis from a porcine aortic valve (discussed in
a previous section), and their in vivo consequences
(Table V).
Calcification
Calcification typically begins deep within the
substance of the cusps (intrinsic mineralization).
13,51,73–75,88,89 Calcific deposits predominate at the
commissural tissue adjacent to the stent posts and
basal attachment margins (areas of leaflet flexion
where deformations are maximal). Calcification can
also occur in adherent thrombi or infective vegetations
(extrinsic mineralization).13,51,73–75,88,89
Implicit in our work over the years has been the
hypothesis that calcification in experimental models
and clinical bioprostheses share common pathophysiology
independent of implant site, and that the pathology,
pathophysiology, and prevention of bioprosthetic
tissue calcification can be investigated using
experimental models.51,63,74,75,89–92 Orthotopic mitral
and conduit-mounted valves in calves and sheep
and subcutaneous implantation in rodents are most
widely used. Bioprosthetic tissue calcifies progressively
and rapidly in immature animals, analogous to
the accelerated rate of calcification in young patients
discussed previously, with morphology similar to that
observed in clinical specimens. Calcification of a degree
similar to that encountered in clinical specimens
is achieved in 3 weeks (approximately 80–120 mg/mg
calcium) in tissue implanted subcutaneously in
3-week-old weanling rats; maximal levels (200–250
mg/mg calcium) occur in approximately 8 weeks.63,90,91
Sheep mitral valve implants accumulate similar levels
of mineral in 3–5 months.92 In these models, the morphology,
kinetics, and chemistry of calcification in
porcine valve and bovine pericardial tissue are identical.
In vitro models of calcification have been reported;
their use to elucidate mechanisms or test anticalcification
strategies has been minimal.93–96
Mineralization of bioprosthetic valves has host, implant,
and mechanical determinants.4,5,74,75,90,91 It is
widely accepted that mechanical stress stimulates calcification.
Figure 4. Unified model for structural dysfuction of bioprosthetic heart valves, relating isolated tissue processes of mineralization
(pathway 1) and noncalcific degradation (pathway 2) to gross clinical failures. Such failures have calcification with
cuspal stiffening, cuspal defects without calcific deposits, or cuspal tears associated with mineralization. Calcification and
noncalcific deterioration may occur independently of one another, or they may be synergistic. Implant and host factors
interact to induce the collagen-oriented calcific deposits noted ultrastructurally. The deposits predominate at flexion points
such as the commissures (pathway 1). Stress causes disruption of collagen fibers, which may eventuate in gross cuspal defects
(pathway 2). Although dynamic mechanical activity is not a prerequisite for calcification, stress may enhance calcification
through unknown mechanisms. Moreover, calcific deposits induce stress concentrations. Reproduced by permission from
Schoen FJ, Levy RJ. Cardiol Clin 1984;2:717–739.
TABLE V
In Vivo Effects of Fabrication-Induced Changes in Bioprostheses Constructed from Porcine Aortic Valves
Nevertheless, subcutaneous implants
do calcify with a morphology and extent
observed in clinical and experimental circulatory implants
despite the absence of both dynamic mechanical
activity and blood contact characteristic of the circulatory
environment. This strongly suggests that
mineralization requires only exposure of a susceptible
substrate to extracellular fluid. Glutaraldehyde cross
linking potentiates mineral deposition,98–100 suggesting
that the fundamental mechanisms of tissue mineralization
depend on specific biochemical modifications
to implant microstructural components induced
by aldehyde or other pretreatment. However, the acceleration
of mineralization observed in younger patients
emphasizes the effect of environmental factors.
The progression, morphologic characteristics, and a
schematic model of experimental bioprosthetic valve
calcification are illustrated in Figure 5.63,75,91 Histologic
and ultrastructural examination of explants from
humans and both large and small experimental animals
shows that early deposits are predominantly localized
to transplanted connective tissue cells but also
involve extracellular collagen fibers [Fig. 5(A–
D)].51,63,74,75,88,90–92,101 With increasing duration of implantation,
cell-associated deposits increase in size
and number, obliterating cells and dissecting among
the collagen bundles. Proliferation of nucleation sites
and crystal growth result in progressive confluence of
diffusely distributed microcrystals with macroscopic
nodules, which focally obliterate implant architecture
and ulcerate through the cuspal surface [Fig. 5(B)].
The process of calcification has two major phases:
nucleation (or initiation) and propagation of crystals.
102 The critical event in the nucleation of intrinsic
bioprosthetic tissue mineralization is most likely to be
the reaction of calcium derived from plasma with organic
phosphorus obtained from the crosslinked, nonviable
residual cells.13,51,63,90,91 This is hypothesized to
occur as follows13,51,63: Normal cells have an approximately
ten-thousandfold gradient of calcium from
outside to inside (10−3 vs. 10−7M); the low intracellular
calcium concentrations are maintained by energydependent
pumps at the cell membranes. In cells rendered
nonviable by glutaraldehyde fixation (or injured
by autolysis, ischemia, or trauma in tissue that is
not chemically preserved), energy is unavailable,
membranes are disrupted, and calcium extrusion from
cells is impaired. This allows high concentrations of
calcium in the fluid bathing the tissue to nucleate calcific
crystals by reacting with phosphorus (as phospholipids
in the cell membranes, nucleus, and other
organelles such as mitochondria). Propagation of crystal
formation depends on the available concentrations
of Ca2+ and PO4
3− and the balance of calcification inhibitors
and accelerators.
Calcification of collagen103 and elastin104 occur by
independent yet poorly understood mechanisms.
However, an important difference in the calcification
of these two important ECM proteins is that mineralization
within elastin fibers occurs whether or not the
protein is crosslinked while that of collagen requires
alteration such as aldehyde crosslinking.104 Calcification
of the aortic wall portion of glutaraldehydepretreated
porcine aortic valve has been noted in clinical
and experimental explants (see later).105–108 Mineral
deposition occurs throughout the vascular cross
section but is accentuated in the dense bands at the
inner and outer media; cells and elastin are the major
sites.
Like pathologic calcification in general, bioprosthetic
tissue mineralization resembles physiological
musculoskeletal mineralization.13,51,63,90,91,109 In both,
crystal formation is largely associated with cell membranes.
In bone, the membranous elements in which
calcification begins are known as matrix vesicles; in
pathological calcification, a similar role is played by
membranes and their fragments derived from degenerate,
aging, injured, or dead cells. In both physiological
and pathological calcification, the deposits are
crystalline calcium phosphate, chemically related to
hydroxyapatite, and in both, extracellular matrix calcification
also occurs.63,90,91,109,110
Recent evidence suggests that both physiologic and
pathologic (arterial) calcification are genetically controlled
by inhibitory molecules,111–114 and that calcification
occurs passively when inhibitors are absent. In
normal bone calcification, the growth of apatite crystals
is regulated by several noncollagenous matrix
proteins, including: (a) osteopontin, an acidic calciumbinding
phosphoprotein with high affinity to hydroxyapatite
that is abundant in foci of cardiovascular
calcification115,116, (b) osteonectin, also known as secreted
protein acidic rich in cysteine (SPARC); and (c)
osteocalcin, and other g-carboxyglutamic acid (GLA)–
containing proteins, such as matrix GLA protein
(MGP).117,118 Transgenic mice lacking MGP exhibit inappropriate
calcification of cartilage and die as a result
of arterial calcification and blood vessel rupture.113
Osteopontin has been clearly shown to inhibit calcification
of vascular smooth muscle cell cultures,114 and
has been demonstrated in calcified bioprosthetic and
native heart valves removed from patients,119,120 consistent
with its regulatory role in vitro.
Noncalcific valvular deterioration
There is considerable evidence that degradation of
the valvular structural matrix independent of calcification
is a major mechanism of porcine and pericardial
bioprosthetic valve structural degradation.51 It is hypothesized
that clinical bioprosthetic valve failure
manifested as tearing is due to localized cuspal damage
at stressed regions, such as valvular commissures
and points of maximal cuspal flexion where cuspal
motions are unphysiologic (perhaps causing buckling).
44,45 Noncalcific damage to the valvular structural
matrix could accrue through a combination of
factors which include abnormal valve motion, inhibition
of the structural rearrangements which occur during
normal valve function, loss of cell-mediated remodeling
and replenishment of the valvular extracellular
matrix, and damage both due to chemical and
possibly molecular determinants (see below).
Chemical pretreatment obviates the dynamic structural
rearrangements that optimize natural valve function.
23,24 This causes increased flexural stresses that
can induce damage to cuspal collagen fibers, particularly
in regions subjected to compressive
stresses.121,122 The patterns of structural damage are
consistent in vitro and in vivo123–125 (Fig. 6). In vitro
accelerated testing yields a consistent pattern of collagen
deterioration. The regions affected are located
near the nodulus of Arantii and extending down toward
the basal attachments, as noted by small-angle
light scattering (SALS); these structural changes are
accompanied by a dramatic loss of flexural stiffness
(Ivan Vesely, personal communication).124,126 In human
explanted bioprosthetic heart valves, regions of
structural damage not corresponding to areas of calcification
are also noted by SALS in a band extending
from the nodulus through the belly to the aortic attachments,
nearly identical to but more heterogeneous
than that in in vitro fatigued bioprosthetic heart valves,
with evidence of interlayer shearing in the damaged
regions.125 The damage includes delamination, fracture,
and frank loss of fibers. Other investigators have
described an approximately 50% reduction in strength
in bioprosthetic valves after 48 months in humans.127
Molecular and biochemical changes in collagen may
also contribute to progressive damage and the propensity
to calcify. Increased levels of extracellular matrix
degrading activity, including matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs), are noted in clinically explanted bioprostheses.
124,129 Changes occur in the molecular
conformation of collagen, which are currently under
further investigation.128 Progressive and marked
depletion of GAGs follows in vitro or in vivo valve
function.124,130 Since GAGs are largely responsible for
tissue viscoelasticity and accommodation of the dynamic
relationship between fibrous cuspal layers, removal
of GAGs may be important in mechanically
mediated valve deterioration.
Calcific and noncalcific damage could be synergistic.
51 Collagen disruption could expose or produce
new calcium nucleation sites, create internal spaces
which facilitate calcific crystal growth, or promote
fluid insudation. Conversely, mechanical damage
could result from calcification-induced structural disruption
or stress concentrations within the cusp.
Clearly, maintenance of tissue structural integrity is
critical to extending durability of tissue heart valves,
through prevention of calcific and noncalcific mechanisms
of deterioration. Moreover, GAGs may also
play a role as physiologic inhibitors of calcification,
but this is controversial.
Figure 5. Experimental calcification of porcine bioprosthetic aortic heart valves and pericardium, as tissue implanted
subcutaneously in 3-week-old rats. (A) Twenty-one-day subcutaneous implant demonstrating discrete deposits and early
nodule formation (arrow). (B) Eighty-four-day subcutaneous implant demonstrating ulceration of calcific nodule through
cuspal surface (arrow). (C) Ultrastructure of calcific deposits in cell (arrow). Bar = 1 mm. (D) Ultrastructure of collagen
calcification. Bar = 1 mm. (A,B) von Kossa stain (calcium phosphate black). (A) Original magnification ×200; (B) approximately
×100. Ultrathin sections stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate. (E) Progression of calcification (as determined by calcium
and phosphorus assay) in glutaraldehyde-pretreated porcine aortic valve and bovine pericardium implanted subcutaneously
in rats. (F) Schematic model for calcification of clinical bioprosthetic heart valves based on clinical and experimental data.
(A–D,F) Reproduced by permission from Schoen FJ, et al. Onset and progression of experimental bioprosthetic heart valve
calcification. Lab Invest 1985;52:523–532. (E) Reproduced by permission from Schoen FJ, Levy RJ. Pathophysiology of bioprosthetic
heart valve calcification. In: Bodnar E, Yacoub MH, editors. Biological and bioprosthetic valves. New York: Yorke;
1986. p 418.
Figure 6. Noncalcific valve deterioration associated with functional cuspal movements, in vitro and in vivo (A,B) Visualization
of damage by small-angle light scattering (SALS). Damage is depicted as black and hatched regions, and is similar in
explanted clinical valve and valve cycled in vitro. (A) Cusp from explanted clinical valve showing pronounced matrix
structural damage in the belly region of the cusp. Calcification in this valve was mild and limited to commissures and basal
attachments (in collaboration with Dr. Michael Sacks, University of Pittsburgh). (B) Cusp from valve which has undergone
in vitro accelerated testing. (C) Transmission electron photomicrograph of cusp from in vitro fatigued valve showing area of
disrupted collagen [compare with Fig. 2(D)]. Bar = 1 mm. (D–G) Light microscopic morphology of noncalcific degeneration
in clinical explants. (D) Photomicrograph of hematoxylin and eosin-stained histologic section, demonstrating loss of architectural
demarcations, loss of staining of the original valvular cellularity, as well as focal delaminations of the collagenous
skeleton. (E) Photomicrograph of histologic section from clinical explant stained with Picrosirius red technique and examined
under polarized light, demonstrating disruption of cuspal collagen and valve thickening due to insudation of plasma.
Compare with (F), section of standard porcine aortic valve bioprosthesis (fixed at 80-mm Hg gradient across cusps) and (G),
section of porcine aortic valve fixed at zero transmural pressure, both prepared and photographed similarly to (E). (D–G)
Original magnification ×40.
Immunologic/inflammatory processes
No causal immunologic basis has been demonstrated
for bioprosthetic valve failure. To what extent,
if any, immunologic processes contribute to calcific or
noncalcific tissue valve deterioration is uncertain and
highly controversial. It is well appreciated that (a)
crosslinking reduces but does not eliminate the antigenicity
of bioprosthetic material, (b) experimental
animals can be sensitized to both fresh and crosslinked
bioprosthetic valve tissues,132,133 (c) antibodies
to valve components can be detected in some patients
following valve dysfunction,134 and (d) failed tissue
valves occasionally have mononuclear inflammation.
However, neither nonspecific inflammation nor specific
immunologic responses appear to mediate experimental
bioprosthetic tissue calcification, and neither
mineral deposition nor resorption is associated with
inflammation. The extent and morphology of mineralization
are not altered by enclosure of valve cusps in
filter chambers that prevent host cell contact with tissue
but allow free diffusion of extracellular fluid,90 or
implantation of valve tissue in congenitally athymic
(“nude”) mice, who have essentially no T-cell function.
135 Moreover, clinical data show that second bioprosthetic
valve replacements fail no sooner than initial
replacements,136 and clinical and experimental
data detecting antibodies to valve tissue probably reflect
a secondary response to valve damage and resultant
exposure of new antigenic determinants due to
failure, rather than its cause.
Indeed, recent experimental evidence suggests that
valvular endothelium may uniquely resist immunological
reactivity. When pig hearts are transplanted
into baboons, they undergo rapid rejection, of which
severe endothelial cell-leukocyte adhesion in the vasculature
and massive myocardial hemorrhage are
characteristic features. However, in these same hearts,
the aortic valve surfaces are remarkably free of inflammatory
cells (Raymond Chan, David Adams, Richard
Mitchell, unpublished research). These findings support
our previous hypothesis that either the regional
hemodynamics or the intrinsic endothelial cell properties
(or both) prevent leukocyte adhesion to transplanted
aortic and perhaps other cardiac valves.137
This hypothesis is reinforced by data that show that
endothelial cells from various vascular beds can respond
to and have different responses to the immunologic,
chemical, and hemodynamic signals.138,139
RECENT TECHNOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENTS
Anticalcification
Since calcification has been the major identifiable
pathologic process contributory to valve failure, efforts
toward preventing this process have been active.
Three strategies have been considered: (a) systemic
therapy with anticalcification agents; (b) local therapy
with implantable drug delivery devices; and (c) biomaterial
modifications, whether by removal of a calcifiable
component, addition of an exogenous agent,
or chemical alteration.4,140
Calcification of bioprosthetic tissue implanted subcutaneously
in rats can be prevented by adequate
doses of systemic agents used to treat clinical metabolic
bone disease [e.g., diphosphonates such as
ethane hydroxybisphonate (EHBP)].141 However, such
drugs interfere with physiologic calcification (i.e.,
bone growth), and animals receiving doses sufficient
to prevent bioprosthetic tissue calcification have
stunted growth. Thus, systemic therapy is not likely to
be generally useful to prevent tissue valve calcification.
Controlled-release drug delivery in the vicinity of
the valve limits effective drug levels to the needed site
while preventing systemic side effects.142 Studies incorporating
EHBP in ethylene-vinyl acetate (EVA),
other polymers, and reservoirs have shown the effectiveness
of this strategy in animal models.143–145
The approach most likely to rapidly yield improved
clinical valves involves modification of the substrate,
whether by removing or altering a calcifiable component
or binding an inhibitor.4,140 Several agents studied
have demonstrated efficacy, specific mechanisms,
lack of adverse effects, and potential clinical utility
(Table VI). Several are discussed below. Synergism
may also be provided by multiple anticalcification
agents and approaches used simultaneously. Proof of
a role for inhibitors in vivo, such as osteopontin or
GAGs discussed above, might represent a therapeutic
opportunity, whereby appropriate substances could
be added to the tissue valve environment.
Diphosphonates
Ethane hydroxybisphonate (discussed above) has
been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) for human use to inhibit pathologic calcification
and to treat hypercalcemia of malignancy.
Compounds of this type probably inhibit calcification
by poisoning the growth of calcific crystals. Tissue
pretreatment with diphosphonate compounds, or systemic
or local therapy of the host with diphosphonates
inhibits experimental calcification.
TABLE VI
Mechanism-Based Anticalcification Agents:
Established Prototypes
Trivalent metal ions
Pretreatment with iron and aluminum (e.g., FeCl3
and AlCl3) inhibits calcification of glutaraldehydepretreated
porcine cusps or pericardium implanted
subdermally.146,147 These cations are hypothesized to
act through complexing phosphate and preventing
calcium phosphate formation and are also active when
released from polymeric controlled-release implants.
Interestingly, AlCl3-pretreated elastin resists calcification.
104 The effect of aluminum chloride appears to be
due to several factors. For example, AlCl3 also changes
the structure of the elastin molecule, rendering purified
elastin implants resistant to calcification. Aluminum
binding to purified elastin restricts parts of the
molecule from calcium phosphate crystal deposition,
and causes an irreversible loss of helicity, with reduction
in the extent of beta-sheet structure.
Amino-oleic acid
Two-alpha-amino-oleic acid (AOAt; Biomedical
Design, Atlanta, GA) bonds covalently to bioprosthetic
tissue through an amino linkage to residual aldehyde
functions and inhibits calcium flux through
bioprosthetic cusps.107,148 AOA is effective in mitigating
cusp but not aortic wall calcification in rat subdermal
and cardiovascular implants.107,148,149
Surfactants
The treatment of bioprosthetic tissue with sodium
dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and other detergents extracts the
majority of acidic phospholipids.4,150 This is associated
with reduced mineralization, probably resulting
from suppression of the initial cell membrane–
oriented calcification.
Ethanol
Ethanol preincubation of glutaraldehyde-cross
linked porcine aortic valve bioprostheses prevents calcification
of valve cusps in both rat subdermal implants
and sheep mitral valve replacements.151,152 Pretreatment
with 80% ethanol (a) extracts almost all
phospholipids and cholesterol from glutaraldehydecrosslinked
cusps, (b) causes a permanent alteration in
collagen conformation as assessed by attenuated total
reflectance-Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
(ATR-FTIR), (c) affects cuspal interactions with water
and lipids, and (d) enhances cuspal resistance to collagenase.
151,152
Decellularization
Since the initial mineralization starts within the devitalized
connective cells of bioprosthetic tissue, attempts
have been made to extract these cells from the
tissue, with the intent of making the bioprosthetic matrix
less prone to calcification.153–155
Tissue fixatives other than glutaraldehyde and
modification of glutaraldehyde fixation
Since previous studies have demonstrated that glutaraldehyde
fixation is conducive to calcification of
bioprosthetic tissue, several studies have investigated
modifications of and alternatives to conventional glutaraldehyde
pretreatment. For example, residual glutaraldehyde
residues can be neutralized in bioprosthetic
tissue by treatment with amino acids (e.g.,
lysine); this inhibits calcification of subdermal implants.
58,60,156 Crosslinking of bioprosthetic tissue with
epoxides, carbodiimides, acylazides, and other compounds
reduces their calcification in rat subdermal
implant studies.140,157–160 Photooxidative preservation
inhibits experimental calcification, possibly owing to
the formation of unique calcification-resistant crosslinks.
161
Investigators of an anticalcification strategy must
demonstrate not only effectiveness of a therapy, but
also the absence of adverse effects.4,140,162 Adverse effects
in this setting could include systemic or local
toxicity, tendency toward thrombosis or infection, induction
of immunological effects, or structural degradation,
with either immediate loss of mechanical
properties or premature deterioration and failure. The
treatment should not impede normal valve performance,
such as hemodynamics and durability. A rational
approach for preventing bioprosthetic calcification
must interface safety and efficacy considerations
with the scientific basis for inhibition of calcium phosphate
crystal formation, of necessity involving the
steps summarized in Table VII.
Stentless porcine aortic valve bioprostheses
Nonstented (stentless) porcine aortic valve bioprostheses
comprise glutaraldehyde-pretreated pig aortic
root and valve cusps that have no supporting stent.
Two such models were approved by the U.S. FDA in
1997 for insertion into the aortic site [St. Jude Medical
Toronto SPVt (St. Jude Medical, St. Paul, MN) and
Medtronic Freestylet (Medtronic Heart Valves, Santa
Ana, CA) bioprostheses].163,164 They differ slightly in
overall configuration (particularly the amount of aortic
wall included), details of glutaraldehyde pretreatment
conditions and further fabrication, and whether
anticalcification technology is used. Both have at least
a partial Dacron cloth covering over the proximal edge
of the prosthesis that contains the porcine right coronary
cuspal muscle shelf and cusps fixed at zeropressure
differential. The Freestylet valve is treated
with AOA. Other variants of this concept are also in
clinical trials.165 The principal advantage of a stentless
porcine aortic valve is that it allows for the implantation
of a larger bioprosthesis (than stented) in any
given aortic root, which may enhance hemodynamics,
ventricular remodeling, and patient survival.
TABLE VII
Requisite Steps in Development of Clinical
Anticalcification Agent
Identification of agents targeted to specific pathogenetic
events of calcification
Determination of mechanisms by pertinent in vitro and in
vivo tests
Documentation of lack of adverse effects on tissue
morphology
In vitro accelerated durability tests and hemodynamic studies
Evaluation of efficacy and safety in large animal model
studies in device configuration
Appropriate clinical trials
The potential and observed complications with nonstented
bioprostheses are comparable to those of
stented valves, including thromboembolism, endocarditis,
and structural dysfunction. However, nonstented
porcine aortic valves have greater portions of
aortic wall exposed to blood than in currently used
stented valves, and calcification of the aortic wall is
potentially deleterious105–108 (Fig. 7). Indeed, allograft
valved conduits frequently fail because of calcific stenosis,
with prominent deposits in the wall.137,167 Calcification
of the wall portion of a stentless valve could
stiffen the root, altering hemodynamic efficiency,
cause nodular calcific obstruction or wall rupture,
or provide a nidus for emboli. Important in this respect
is the observation that some anticalcification
agents (see later), including AOA and ethanol, prevent
experimental cuspal but not aortic wall calcification.
107,140,148,149 Additional consequences of an increased
amount of xenograft tissue in contact with the
recipient’s tissue are possible, such as immunological
reactivity and adherence, leading to difficulty in reoperation.
Moreover, host tissue overgrowth (pannus)
beyond the suture lines, closer to the valve cusps than
with stented valves, could be more often a problem
than with a stented valve. Stentless porcine mitral
valves are also being investigated.
Figure 7. Experimental calcification of stentless porcine
valve aortic wall. (A) Gross photographs and (B) radiograph
of removed nonstented porcine valve implanted as apicoaortic
shunt in a sheep for 5 months. Calcification of aortic
wall is prominent, predominating along the margins of the
sinuses of Valsalva [arrow in (B)]. (C) Photomicrograph of
removed nonstented porcine valve aortic wall. Calcification
is diffuse, involving the entire cross section, most predominantly
in the innermost and outermost 20% of the media.
Stained with von Kossa’s reagent (calcium phosphates
black). Original magnification approximately ×50. Reproduced
by permission from Gott JP, et al. Ann Thorac Surg
1977;64:50–58.
Valvular allografts/homografts
Human aortic valve allografts (also called homografts)
are obtained from cadavers (although previously
also from diseased hearts removed at transplantation),
and cryopreserved (without chemical
crosslinking) by freezing with protection from crystallization
by dimethyl sulfoxide, followed by storage at
−196°C in the vapor over liquid nitrogen. They are
implanted directly into the aortic root without a stent
as an isolated valve or root inclusion prosthesis, or as
a full root replacement. Aortic or pulmonary valve
allografts have exceptionally good hemodynamic profiles
and a low incidence of thromboembolic complications
without chronic anticoagulation.169–172 Such
valves are especially efficacious for replacing those
excised because of endocarditis.173 Cryopreservation
permits long shelf-life with development of a banking
system and potential commercialization. The quality
of cryopreserved valvular tissue depends on details of
freezing and thawing protocols, the interval from
death to harvest, and additional warm and cold ischemic
intervals.
Contemporary cryopreserved allograft valves are
free of degeneration and/or replacement for periods
equal to or slightly better than those of conventional
porcine bioprosthetic valves (approximately 50–90%
valve survival at 10–15 years for allografts compared
with 40–60% for bioprostheses).32,85 Nevertheless, progressive
degeneration limits their long-term success.
32,85,137,167 The mode of failure of these valves
when inserted on the left side of the heart is most
frequently incompetence caused by cusp rupture, distortion
with retraction, or perforations. In contrast,
right-sided valves in children who have right ventricle
to pulmonary artery conduits usually stenose as a result
of somatic growth of the recipient, with or without
calcification of the cusps or distal vascular wall.
The most critical and controversial issues in the pathology
of valvular allografts relate to viability of the
transplanted endothelial and interstitial cells, extracellular
matrix integrity, and mechanisms of deterioration,
including the role of immune responses. We recently
studied cryopreserved human allograft heart
valves explanted to 9 years postoperatively, and aortic
valves removed from allograft heart transplants, in
situ up to 4 years.137 There was progressive loss of
normal structural complexity and cellularity of the
cusps beginning early after implantation, including
endothelium and deep connective tissue cells. Minimal
inflammatory cells were found at all postoperative
intervals. Long-term cryopreserved allografts (>1
year) had flattened and thinned cusps with obliteration
of the usual corrugations, indistinct layers, and no
stainable interstitial or endothelial cells. Cuspal calcification
was usually absent or only focal, despite extensive
wall calcification in some explants, especially
in stenosed right ventricular-pulmonary artery conduits
from children. In our study, transmission electron
microscopy of long-term allograft valves revealed
no viable cells, focal calcification centered around
dead cell remnants, and distorted but largely preserved
collagen, strikingly similar to that of glutaraldehyde-
pretreated porcine bioprosthetic heart valves.
The lack of viable cells in cryopreserved human allograft
valves, noted early following implantation, is
primarily attributable to damage related to ischemia
associated with harvest, cryopreservation, and surgery,
and may occur through apoptosis, a distinct
form of cell death.174 Nevertheless, some workers report
long-term survival of certain cellular elements in
both experimental systems and explanted allografts
from human recipients.169,175 However, an occasional
viable cell will neither be able to repopulate the entire
valve nor materially contribute to matrix remodeling.
Our study indicates that cryopreserved allografts
are unable to grow, remodel, or exhibit active metabolic
functions and their usual degeneration cannot be
attributed to immunologic responses.137 Moreover,
cryopreserved allograft valve durability must depend
predominantly on the quality of the collagenous skeleton.
Indeed, degeneration of the extracellular matrix
likely accounts for the modest rate of progressive dysfunction
in the aortic site in adults. In contrast, we
found that aortic valves from transplanted hearts have
remarkable structural preservation, including endothelium
and abundant deep connective tissue cells;
inflammatory infiltrates are generally mild and of no
apparent deleterious consequence, including valves
from patients who died of acute myocardial parenchymal
rejection or graft coronary arteriosclerosis.137 Our
results further support the hypothesis that (a) valves
are uniquely resistant to immunological attack, and
(b) the structural basis of valve performance is the
quality of the original collagenous skeleton, since
these valves are without viable cellular elements.
Pulmonary autograft replacement of the aortic
valve (Ross procedure) and other autograft tissues
Since the original description by Ross in 1968, replacement
of the aortic valve or root using the patient’s
own pulmonary valve (pulmonary autograft)
has become widely accepted.176,177 The objective is to
provide a hemodynamically superior and potentially
viable valve that might grow with somatic growth of
children for whom there is no satisfactory alternative.
The removed pulmonary valve is usually replaced by
an allograft pulmonic valve.
Consistent with favorable clinical results yielding
few late specimens, descriptive pathologic findings on
pulmonary valve autografts to the aortic root have not
been reported in detail. We have encountered several
cases that span the perioperative period to long term
and have found that the valve cusps of the aortic autograft
appear to retain normal architecture and the
staining qualities of both cells and extracellular matrix
to at least 6 years. In contrast, the aortic wall may
suffer ischemic necrosis, inflammation, and scarring
following the procedure, probably owing to the requisite
transection of the vasa vasorum of the pulmonary
artery during the procedure. Remodeling of the
pulmonary arterial wall tissue most likely accounts for
progressive luminal dilation following implantation of
the pulmonary valve and wall into the systemic circulation
that is frequently noted clinically.
Another approach is a valve composed of autologous
pericardium, excised, and fixed in glutaraldehyde
for 5 to 15 min at the time of surgery, cut by
means of a special die, and subsequently mounted on
a stent.178 Short-term fixation stiffens the tissue and
renders handling easier, but the effects on calcification
and other biological and physical properties are unknown.
Nonstented aortic and mitral prostheses fabricated
freehand from lightly fixed autologous pericardium
are also under investigation.
FUTURE CONSIDERATIONS, INCLUDING
TISSUE ENGINEERING
We have described above the most active areas of
basic research, industrial development, and clinical investigation
in tissue valves. The “Holy Grail” is a nonobstructive,
nonthrombogenic tissue valve substitute
which will last the lifetime of the patient, provide ongoing
remodeling and repair of cumulative injury, and
potentially grow in maturing recipients. Particularly
exciting in concept yet early in practice is the approach
called tissue engineering, in which an anatomically
appropriate construct containing cells seeded on a resorbable
scaffold is fabricated in vitro in a bioreactor,
then implanted.179,180 Specific biological signals (such
as patterning genes, growth factors, and cytokines)
may also be incorporated. Remodeling of the construct
in vivo is intended to recapitulate normal functional
architecture. The design criteria for such a valve are
summarized in Table VIII.
Initial attempts to fabricate such prototypes are encouraging.
181–183 Representative work in this area
from Dr. John Mayer, Dr. Simon Hoerstrup, Dr. Ralf
Sodian, and Dr. Uli Stock, Children’s Hospital, Boston,
is illustrated in Figure 8. They have implanted tissueengineered
valve cusps and valve conduits in the pulmonary
valve position in lambs, demonstrating the
initial feasibility of the concept of a tissue-engineered
heart valve. In work elsewhere, human vascular
smooth-muscle cells (SMCs) cultured with ascorbic
acid produced a cohesive cellular sheet which formed
the media; a similar sheet of human fibroblasts was
wrapped around the media to provide the adventitia
and endothelial cells were seeded in the lumen.184 The
result was a well-defined, three-layered organization
with appropriate extracellular matrix proteins, including
elastin; short-term experiments in a canine model
demonstrated good handling characteristics. More recently,
a tissue-engineering approach was developed
to produce vascular graft material from smoothmuscle
and endothelial cells that were derived from a
biopsy of vascular tissue. Cultured vessels contained
SMCs that showed contractile reponses to pharmacological
agents and displayed markers of differentiation
such as calponin and myosin heavy chains. Tissue-
engineered arteries were implanted in miniature
swine, with patency documented up to 24 days by
digital angiography.
TABLE VIII
Desirable Characteristics of a Tissue-Engineered
Heart Valve
Endothelialized blood-contacting surface
Cellular potential for extracellular matrix synthesis,
remodeling, and repair
Appropriate heterogeneity, anisotropy, and amount of
extracellular matrix
Stable geometry but potential growth with patient
Absence of deleterious immunological and other
inflammatory processes
Resistance to calcification
Resistance to tissue overgrowth
Stable mechanical properties
Large effective orifice area
Prompt and complete closure
Resistance to infection
Chemically inertness and lack of hemolysis
Easy and permanent insertion
Tissue-engineering approaches to valve substitution
(and the associated vascular conduits) are imaginative
and hold great potential, but to date, the efforts have
been largely empirical. We must appreciate that the
mechanisms of valvular morphogenesis during embryological
development are highly regulated and
complex, and will be difficult to stimulate. Indeed,
they are only beginning to be understood.186,187 Moreover,
the vascular wall cells that make up large vessels
are much better characterized than valvular cells.
There is great need to learn more about the cell biology
of valve endothelial and interstitial cells (and their
interactions) to facilitate tissue engineering efforts in
this area. Such efforts have been initiated in the laboratory
of Dr. Joyce Bischoff ( Children’s Hospital, Boston)
and Dr. Magdi Yacoub (Harefield Hospital, London).
188 Preliminary results indicate that considerable
phenotypic heterogeneity exits in valvular cells, both
endothelial and interstitial, and their response to environmental
stimuli. Indeed, “transdifferentiation” of
endothelial cells to interstitial cells during embryonic
valve development has been reported, and there is
evidence to suggest that this phenomenon may occur
postnatally.189 Moreover, there is ample evidence for
phenotypic modulation of vascular SMCs (which
many interstitial cells resemble) between contractile
and “synthetic” during intimal thickening, a process
which occurs broadly in vascular pathology.13 In this
regard, the possible use of multipotential mesenchymal
stem cells for seeding of valves is particularly
exciting, and may obviate the issue of a preselected
cell phenotype.190 An additional concern relates to the
functional role of neural elements, which have recently
been demonstrated in valves.191 It is unknown
whether they will need to be replicated in a truly tissue-
engineered valve. Thus, it should be readily appreciated
that continued progress in this area must
depend strongly on (a) the utilization of concepts of
normal valvular and vascular development, structure
and function, including cell sorting in development,
extracellular matrix biology, and valvular cell biology
and responses to injury; (b) the considerable understanding
developed over the past several decades concerning
failure modes and the structural basis for favorable
substitute tissue valve performance; and (c)
the basic mechanisms of physiological repair processes
and the interactions of tissue valves with the
host tissues. Many of the key pragmatic considerations
related to the use of cells, scaffolds, and biological
signals in a tissue engineered valve are summarized
in Table IX.
Figure 8. Progress toward a tissue-engineered heart valve. Work done by S. P. Hoerstrup, U. Stock, and D. Sodian in the
laboratory of J. E. Mayer (Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA). (A) Cusp and adjacent conduit of whole unimplanted cuspconduit
construct from mixed arterial wall cells, on a polyglycolic acid scaffold, cultured for 4 days static followed by 21 days
in a bioreactor. Histologic sections. (B) Unimplanted. (C,D) Biodegradable polymer-based construct implanted 4 months in
sheep pulmonary artery. (B) shows scaffold fibers and tissue with dense, regular cellularity and extracellular matrix production
[glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) but not morphologically detectable collagen or elastin]. (C) Low-power photomicrograph
of proximal cusp, showing oriented fibrous encapsulation of scaffold without thrombus. (D) Higher-power photomicrograph
of wall showing fibrous encapsulation with resorption and tissue replacement of portions of the polymer scaffold.
(B–D) Stained with Movat stain; original magnifications ×75.
TABLE IX
Critical Considerations for Tissue-Engineered
Heart Valves
Cells
Tissue source, age, species
Cell type, heterogeneity within cell type
Phenotype (differentiated vs. stem cell, modulation,
dysfunction)
Preseed culture conditions
Viability
Method of preservation
Mechanotransduction
ECM synthesis and remodeling
Scaffold
Chemistry
Configuration/porosity
Heterogeneity (architecture, composition)
Cell adherence
Biocompatibility
Source of bioactive molecules
Degradation rate (in vitro, in vivo)
Mechanical properties (strength, compliance)
Ease of manufacture
Biological signals
Source
Pure vs. tissue extract
Single vs. multiple
Organ specificity
Function (effect on adhesion, migration, proliferation, and
sorting)
Drug delivery
Genetic manipulation
Construct
Bioreactor medium
Static vs. flow
Growth factors, morphogenetic controls
Degree of maturation at implantation
Functionality
Biocompatibility
Sterilization, storage
Quality control
CONCLUSIONS
Tissue heart valves are a useful component of the
surgical armamentarium used to manage severe valvular
heart disease. Nevertheless, durability limitations
stemming from both calcific and noncalcific tissue
deterioration significantly inhibit more widespread
tissue valve success and thereby use. Of the
considerable ongoing research and developmental efforts
directed toward enhancing tissue valve durability,
studies of the structure and biology of natural
valves and their cellular and extracellular constituents
must be central to these efforts.
In particular, our discussion emphasizes that the essential
structural basis for function of contemporary
glutaraldehyde-pretreated bioprostheses and cryopreserved
allograft heart valves is the quality of the collagenous
matrix retained from the original transplanted
valve. Moreover, in each type of valve substitute
the observed pathology relates to key differences
between the valve substitute and a natural valve: (a)
the cells of the transplanted valve are no longer viable;
(b) the collagenous valve skeleton is chemically and
mechanically altered by valve preparation; (c) the residual
matrix is not repopulated to any extent by recipient
connective tissue or endothelial cells; and (d)
the fragments of the nonviable donor cells represent
the preferred loci for calcification.
These areas of active research and development
which are considered to be of the highest potential
yield in tissue valve research in general are summarized
in Table X. Despite the great potential of the
tissue engineering strategy, it is important to consider
that preservation of viable allogenic donor interstitial
and endothelial cells might potentiate either the heretofore
muted immunological processes or calcification.
Indeed, this consideration is relevant to any tissue-engineered
structure. Thus, the objective of an appropriately
layered tissue-engineered valve composed
of collagenous and noncollagenous elements containing
the requisite endothelial and interstitial cells will
be a significant advance if and only if those cells are
capable of renewing the complex extracellular matrix
elements progressively degraded during function and
if no new complications are introduced. In particular,
considerable research will be necessary on (a) the progressive
evolution of structure; (b) gene expression,
function, and the content of the viable cells; (c) the
composition and organization of the collagen, elastin,
and glycosaminoglycans in a tissue engineered valve,
to validate and maximize the utility of this intellectually
appealing and potentially useful approach; and
(d) mechanotransduction, the effect of mechanically
induced ECM deformation on cellular growth, gene
expression, cell–cell interactions, and cell–ECM interaction.
This is indeed an exciting area of biomaterials
research.
The authors are deeply indebted to the many students,
fellows, senior colleagues, and laboratory personnel at their
own and distant institutions who have contributed to the
work described here. The manuscript was typed by Claudia
Davis.
DISCLOSURE
In the course of consultations on developmental
and/or clinical research over approximately the past 5
years, the authors have received or may receive something
of value from the following organizations that
may be impacted by the work reviewed in this manuscript:
Advanced Tissue Sciences; Allograft Heart
Valve Tissue Bank Consortium; Autogenics, Inc.; Baxter,
Inc.; BioMedical Design, Inc.; Bravo Cardiovascular,
Inc.; CryoLife Cardiovascular, Inc.; Ethicon, Inc.;
Medtronic, Inc.; Mitroflow Medical, Inc.; St. Jude
Medical, Inc.; Sulzer Carbomedics, Inc.; and Tissue
Engineering, Inc.
