Xenograft and organoid model systems in
cancer research
Margit Bleijs1, Marc van de Wetering1, Hans Clevers1,2 & Jarno Drost1,*
Abstract
Patient-derived tumour xenografts and tumour organoids have
become important preclinical model systems for cancer research.
Both models maintain key features from their parental tumours,
such as genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity, which allows them
to be used for a wide spectrum of applications. In contrast to
patient-derived xenografts, organoids can be established and
expanded with high efficiency from primary patient material. On
the other hand, xenografts retain tumour–stroma interactions,
which are known to contribute to tumorigenesis. In this review,
we discuss recent advances in patient-derived tumour xenograft
and tumour organoid model systems and compare their promises
and challenges as preclinical models in cancer research.
Keywords cancer; organoids; preclinical models; tumour heterogeneity; xenografts

Introduction
Cancers consist of a continuously evolving heterogeneous cell mass
(McGranahan & Swanton, 2017). Importantly, not all cells within a
tumour contribute equally to its progression. Early studies on mouse
mammary tumours revealed that cellular subpopulations from different
regions of the same tumour vary in growth rate, drug
response, immunogenicity and metastatic capacity (reviewed in
Heppner, 1984; Tabassum & Polyak, 2015). This intra-tumour
heterogeneity can arise from both genetic and non-genetic variability
within tumours, such as variations in availability of resources,
like differential access to oxygen and nutrients (Kreso & Dick, 2014;
Tabassum & Polyak, 2015). The development of preclinical model
systems phenocopying tumour heterogeneity is required for studying
its contribution to tumour progression and acquisition of therapy
resistance. Whereas the first patient-derived tumour xenograft
(PDTX) models were successfully established during the fifties
(Toolan, 1953), patient-derived tumour organoid (PDTO) models
have been established only during the last decade (Sato et al, 2011)
(Fig 1). Both PDTX and PDTO model systems are able to
recapitulate the intra- and inter-tumour heterogeneity seen in
human cancers (Beckhove et al, 2003; Guenot et al, 2006; Huang
et al, 2015; van de Wetering et al, 2015; Bruna et al, 2016; George
et al, 2017; Nanki et al, 2018; Sachs et al, 2018; Yan et al, 2018).
Therefore, these models are promising tools to study sub-clonal
dynamics within individual tumours during progression and therapy
resistance (Shi et al, 2014).
Due to the complexity of human tumours, response to clinical
cancer treatments varies substantially. Additionally, mechanisms of
tumour progression are poorly defined as well as drug efficacy and
resistance. While a high number of anti-cancer compounds tested
for clinical safety in Phase I studies progress to Phase II efficacy testing,
most of these compounds fail in Phase II and III studies, which
examine the power of pharmacological responses (Dimasi et al,
2013). Such high failure rates in clinical trials headline the need of
preclinical efficacy models for improved predictions of clinical
outcome. Several human preclinical models are currently used,
including cancer cell lines, PDTX and PDTO cultures (Figs 1 and 2).
These models have improved our understanding of the mechanisms
of cancer progression and provided valuable tools for the development
of novel cancer treatments. Additionally, these preclinical
models are used to predict clinical response to anti-cancer agents. In
this review, we discuss PDTX and PDTO model systems and
compare their promises and challenges in cancer research.
PDTX models
To understand cancer biology and its translation into effective treatments,
human preclinical models capturing the heterogeneity of
cancer are fundamental. Although with low efficiency, primary
tumour tissues can be grown in 2D cultures in vitro, allowing
tumour cells capable of adapting to these conditions to expand and
form a cell line. The use of in vitro cancer cell lines has provided
valuable insights on tumour development and mechanisms of therapeutic
actions (Sos et al, 2009; Greshock et al, 2010). However, the
main drawback of cancer cell lines is the lack of both phenotypic
and genetic heterogeneity found in the original tumours (Sachs &
Clevers, 2014; Byrne et al, 2017). To enhance the correlation with
human cancers, surgically derived primary clinical tumour samples
can be grafted into mice, known as PDTX. In such models, tumour
architecture and the relative proportion of cancer cells and stromal
cells are maintained to a large extent, which yields better resemblance
to the original tumour compared to cancer cell lines (Byrne
et al, 2017; Fig 2). Although not all patient-derived tumours can
successfully be engrafted into mice, the success rate of PDTX establishment
is increasing due to the establishment of immunocompromised
mice (Shultz et al, 2005; Drake et al, 2012).
Figure 1. Timeline PDTX and PDTO development.
Although the first documented attempt to transplant a human
cancer into an animal dates back to 1775, a hallmark study by
Helene Toolan showed that it was possible to grow human tumour
cells in x-irradiated mice and rats (Toolan, 1953). Additionally,
she demonstrated that proliferation extended considerably when
the x-radiated hosts were treated with the immune system
suppressor cortisone (Toolan, 1953). Later, Phillips and Gazet
were able to obtain a slightly higher percentage of viable patientderived
tumour grafts by treating the host mice with anti-lymphocyte
serum. The number of viable grafts increased in particular
when combined with thymectomy, demonstrating that a
suppressed immune response enhances engraftment efficiency
(Phillips & Gazet, 1970). Following these studies, several genetically
modified mouse models have been established, which are
severely immune deficient, such as the NOD/SCID/IL2Rcnull (NSG)
mouse (Shultz et al, 2005). The virtual absence of an immune
system in these mice allows for significantly higher engraftment
rates (Shultz et al, 2005; Byrne et al, 2017). Together these studies
demonstrated that loss of immune system activity improves
engraftment and viability of patient-derived tumour tissue into
mice. PDTX models are currently established for a broad variety
of cancers, including colorectal (Fichtner et al, 2004; Guenot et al,
2006), pancreatic (Fu et al, 1992; Kim et al, 2009), breast
(Beckhove et al, 2003; Bruna et al, 2016), lung (Cutz et al, 2006),
skin (Taetle et al, 1987), head and neck (Hennessey et al, 2011),
prostate (Wang et al, 2005) and ovarian cancer (George et al,
2017; Fig 3). Although PDTXs recapitulate tumour tissue more
closely than cancer cell lines, they are usually generated from a
small amount of tumour material. As a consequence, the PDTX
derived from it might not capture the full heterogeneity of the
original tumour (Kemper et al, 2015). Moreover, Morgan and
colleagues recently reported that from the total number of mutations
detected in primary non-small-cell-lung cancer (NSCLC)
tumours, only 43% were detected in the corresponding PDTXs and
four additional mutations arose in early passages of PDTXs that
were not present in the primary tumour (Morgan et al, 2017).
These observations suggest that clonal selection and evolution
may occur early on upon tumour tissue engraftment into mice.
Multiple biopsies from different regions of a tumour should be
engrafted to capture the complete tumour architecture in vivo,
whereas early passages of PDTXs should be used for translational
applications to avoid outcomes that deviate from clinical response.
Furthermore, the limited engraftment rates of PDTXs remain a
major challenge, which is highly variable among cancers (Rosfjord
et al, 2014). Sub-clones of advanced tumours grow best as PDTX,
compared to less advanced tumours. Additionally, growth rates of
engrafted tumour tissue increase over several passages of PDTXs
and a significant correlation was found between PDTX passage
number and features of higher tumour grade (Pearson et al, 2016).
This indicates that clonal selection occurs over passages of PDTXs.
Figure 2. Schematic representation of patient-derived tumour xenografts and organoids.
PDTXs preserve tumour heterogeneity and tumour–stroma interactions. PDTOs grow in a provided basement membrane extract and can be established from epithelial cancer
cells as well as normal epithelial tissue. Both models allow for several translational applications that contribute to development of therapeutic cancer treatments.
The contribution of tumour stroma to tumour growth upon
engraftment remains controversial in PDTX models. Components of
human stroma, including vasculature, immune cells and fibroblasts,
are present during early passages of PDTXs. The presence of these
human stromal components allows for interaction studies between
tumour cells and their microenvironment. However, the human
stroma is subsequently replaced by murine stroma over several
passages of PDTXs (Julien et al, 2012; Peng et al, 2013). Gene
expression studies of NSCLC PDTXs confirmed depletion of humanderived
tumour-associated cells with a downregulation of genes
corresponding to cell adhesion and immune response pathways.
This suggests that the PDTX deviates from the original tumour over
time (Morgan et al, 2017). In addition, drug metabolism and
pharmacokinetics differ between mouse and human, which needs to
be taken into account (Morgan et al, 2017).
Over the years, it has become increasingly clear that orthotopic
transplantation provide a more physiological PDTX than heterotopic
(e.g. subcutaneous) engraftment. It was previously demonstrated
that orthotopic transplantation can lead to local invasive growth
and metastases, similar to those observed in patients (Dai et al,
2015; Hoffman, 2015). In orthotopic PDTXs, tumour-host interactions
can be investigated at the relevant location of primary and
secondary tumour growth, as well as the development of metastases.
In a comparison between orthotopic and subcutaneous xenografts
of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), metabolic
differences were found. These differences could be attributed to
differences in tumour microenvironment caused by the different
location of engraftment (Zhan et al, 2017). These results highlight
the complexity of cancers as well as the importance of location and
environment of the transplantation site. Nonetheless, while orthotopic
PDTXs more accurately mimic the primary tumours by resemblance
of the native microenvironment, this method is technically
challenging and labour-intensive. Therefore, most studies still use
subcutaneous engraftment of tumour tissue.
Figure 3. Pie chart with the different cancer types that can be grown as PDTX (left) and PDTO (right) marked in green.
In general, the engraftment efficiency of PDTXs is lower than the success rate of PDTO establishment.
PDTO models
During the last decade, techniques to grow tissues in vitro in 3D as
organotypic structures have been established. These so-called organoids
can be grown from adult and embryonic stem cells and are
able to self-organize into 3D structures that reflect the tissue of
origin (for adult stem cell-derived organoids), or to which the differentiation
was directed (embryonic stem cell-derived organoids)
(for a review see Clevers, 2016). The first adult stem cell-derived
organoid cultures were established from Lgr5-expressing mouse
intestinal stem cells that were placed in conditions mimicking the
intestinal stem cell niche (Sato et al, 2009). By providing R-spondin-
1, epidermal growth factor (EGF) and Noggin, and embedment of
the cells in an extracellular matrix-providing basement membranes
extract, the Lgr5-expressing stem cells received the signalling cues
necessary to self-renew, proliferate and form differentiated
offspring, resembling the intestinal epithelium (Sato et al, 2009).
Since then, organoid cultures have been established for a variety
of human tissues, including lung (Hild & Jaffe, 2016; Tan et al,
2017; Sachs et al, 2019), colon (Sato et al, 2011), stomach (Bartfeld
et al, 2015), liver (Huch et al, 2015), pancreas (Boj et al, 2015),
prostate (Chua et al, 2014; Karthaus et al, 2014), kidney (Jun et al,
2018; Schutgens et al, 2019) and fallopian tube (Kessler et al,
2015). Moreover, organoid culture protocols have been established
for patient-derived tumour tissue as well. Human tumour organoids
have been generated from colon (Sato et al, 2011; van de Wetering
et al, 2015), pancreas (Boj et al, 2015; Huang et al, 2015), prostate
(Gao et al, 2014; Drost et al, 2016), breast (Sachs et al, 2018),
gastric (Nanki et al, 2018; Yan et al, 2018), lung (Sachs et al, 2019),
oesophageal (Li et al, 2018), bladder (Lee et al, 2018; Mullenders
et al, 2019), ovarian (Kopper et al, 2019), kidney (Schutgens et al,
2019) and liver (Broutier et al, 2017; Li et al, 2019) tumour tissue
(Fig 3). An important feature of a number of these PDTOs is that
they genetically and phenotypically mirror the tumour epithelium,
including its intra-tumour heterogeneity (Huang et al, 2015; van de
Wetering et al, 2015; Nanki et al, 2018; Sachs et al, 2018; Yan et al,
2018). In a recent study, Roerink and colleagues characterized organoids
derived from single cells from several colorectal cancers
(CRC) and showed extensive mutational diversification as well as
differences in responses to anti-cancer drugs between even closely
related cells of the same tumour (Roerink et al, 2018). PDTO models
show improved resemblance to the original tumour compared to 2D
cultured cancer cell lines. Thereby, organoid cultures bridge the gap
between in vitro 2D cancer cell line cultures and in vivo PDTXs
(Sachs & Clevers, 2014; Drost & Clevers, 2018). Importantly, they
can be expanded long term and cryopreserved, allowing for the
generation of living tumour organoid biobanks (Weeber et al, 2015;
van de Wetering et al, 2015; Fujii et al, 2016; Schu¨ tte et al, 2017; Li
et al, 2018; Nanki et al, 2018; Sachs et al, 2018, 2019; Seino et al,
2018; Tiriac et al, 2018; Yan et al, 2018). So far, the majority of
established PDTO cultures originate from epithelial cancers (carcinomas).
Although most common adult cancers are carcinomas and
epithelial in origin, a number of cancers are not, such as sarcomas,
leukaemia and lymphomas. This remains a major challenge in organoid
technology and is in contrast to PDTX models, which allow for
the growth of a broad variety of cancers. While organoid cultures
cannot mimic vasculature and tumour–stroma interactions, patientderived
tumour organoids are a promising tool for several translational
applications, such as high-throughput drug screens and
personalized medicine in a patient-derived manner.
Translational applications of PDTX and PDTO
model systems
Most preclinical anti-cancer agents entering clinical trials fail to
acquire regulatory approval due to insufficient safety or inefficacy.
This highlights the limitations of the predictive value of current
preclinical models. However, in a study where they evaluated the
therapeutic relevance of PDTXs, a panel of six human small-celllung
carcinoma (SCLC) xenografts was treated with topotecan, a
topoisomerase I inhibitor, combinations of topotecan and the topoisomerase
II inhibitor etoposide or alkylating agents ifosfamide or
cisplatin at maximum tolerated dose (Ne´mati et al, 2010). Three out
of the six PDTX models showed over 90% growth inhibition when
treated with topotecan alone, similar to the therapeutic response
observed in Phase II clinical trials (Ardizzoni et al, 1997). Growth
inhibition in the PDTX models was improved when topotecan was
combined with etoposide or ifosfamide. These findings demonstrate
that the established xenografts are useful for preclinical assessment
of new drugs and combinations of drugs (Ne´mati et al, 2010; Rosfjord
et al, 2014). Moreover, Bertotti and colleagues screened a
cohort of 85 metastatic CRC (mCRC) PDTX models, treated with
cetuximab, an inhibiting antibody against epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR). They found an enrichment of tumours with HER2
amplification in cetuximab-resistant KRAS/NRAS/BRAF/PIK3CA
wild-type tumours (Bertotti et al, 2011). This proof-of-concept study
revealed that the combined inhibition of EGFR and HER2 induced
long-lasting tumour regression, suggesting promising therapeutic
opportunities for mCRC patients that are resistant to cetuximab
(Bertotti et al, 2011).
Gao and colleagues generated an extensive collection of more
than 1,000 PDTX models representing a broad range of solid
cancers. In this large panel of PDTX models, genetic hypotheses and
biomarkers of sensitivity to cancer treatments, derived from
cultured cancer cell lines, were successfully validated. Importantly,
the PDTX models also identified therapeutic candidates that cancer
cell lines failed to capture (Gao et al, 2015; Byrne et al, 2017). The
promising results of such large cohort studies increase the use of
PDTXs for preclinical models of testing anti-cancer drugs and to
unravel biomarkers for drug sensitivity and resistance. For example,
a recent study demonstrated that metformin, an anti-diabetic drug,
also affects tumour growth in CRC PDTX models. Administering
metformin at physiological levels of 150 mg/kg per day in mice,
which is equivalent to the clinical dose of 500–1,000 mg/daily in
human, is sufficient to inhibit tumour growth in CRC PDTX. This
implies promising therapeutic options for CRC patients (Suhaimi
et al, 2017). Together, these studies demonstrate the promises of
PDTXs as preclinical models to develop novel cancer treatments and
predict their clinical response in patients.
Fast expansion of preclinical model systems is important to
enable high-throughput drug screens. In contrast to PDTXs, patientderived
organoid cultures can be more easily expanded long term
and several studies demonstrated that organoid cultures allow for
the detection of gene–drug associations and enable high-throughput
drug screens. Verissimo and colleagues tested KRAS pathway inhibitors
and combinations of drugs on normal colon organoids and CRC
PDTOs and demonstrated that only organoids harbouring KRAS
mutations were resistant to the treatments (Verissimo et al, 2016).
In another recent study, Vlachogiannis and colleagues reported a
living biobank of PDTOs from metastatic, heavily pretreated colorectal
and gastroesophageal tumours, which showed a high degree of
similarity to the original patient tumours. A comparison of
responses to anti-cancer agents in PDTOs and PDTO-based orthotopic
mouse tumour xenograft models with the responses of the
patients in clinical trials, suggests that PDTOs successfully
recapitulate the response seen in the patient (Vlachogiannis et al,
2018). Additionally, Tiriac and colleagues generated a pancreatic
cancer PDTO library that largely maintained the mutational spectrum
and transcriptional subtypes of primary pancreatic cancer.
They showed that pancreatic cancer PDTOs exhibited heterogeneous
responses to standard-of-care chemotherapeutics and that these
therapeutic profiles correspond to patient outcomes. These data
suggest that combined molecular and therapeutic profiling of PDTOs
may predict treatment response and enable prospective therapeutic
selection (Tiriac et al, 2018). Moreover, Schu¨ tte and colleagues
collected a large biobank of 106 CRCs, 35 PDTOs and 59 PDTXs to
identify novel biomarkers by linking molecular profiles with drug
sensitivity patterns. Although the genetic landscape of the original
tumours was largely maintained, they also found some differences
between PDTXs and PDTOs, as PDTXs appeared closer to the molecular
distinct CRC groups than PDTOs. Additionally, PDTOs showed
elevated expression levels of genes involved in xenobiotic and fatty
acid processes, which may affect drug sensitivity (Schu¨ tte et al,
2017).
Organoid cultures additionally allow for genetic engineering to
study effects of oncogenic mutations in detail. Li and colleagues
introduced oncogenic mutations into primary organoids from mouse
colon, stomach and pancreas. This study shows that pancreatic and
gastric organoids presented dysplasia as a result of the activating
KrasG12D mutation, loss of Tp53 or both and formed adenocarcinoma
upon in vivo transplantation. In contrast, primary colon organoids
required combinatorial Apc, Tp53, KrasG12D and Smad4
mutations for the formation of adenocarcinoma in vivo. Opposed to
colon organoids, small intestine organoids showed more rapid
dysplasia even with only the combination of mutated Apc and Kras
or mutated Apc and Tp53 (Li et al, 2014). Subsequently, two studies
translated this to the human situation by CRISPR/Cas9-mediated
genome editing of common CRC driver mutations in healthy human
small intestinal and colonic organoids (Drost et al, 2015; Matano
et al, 2015). These studies demonstrated that organoids harbouring
an activating mutation in KRAS, in combination with inactivating
mutations in APC, TP53 and SMAD4, are able to grow independent
of the intestinal stem cell niche factors EGF, Wnt, R-spondin and
Noggin. Additionally, Drost et al showed that loss of APC and TP53
are key drivers of chromosome instability and aneuploidy (Drost
et al, 2015). Not only adult stem cell-derived organoids can be used
to study cancer initiation and progression, but also embryonic stem
cell-derived organoids can be valuable tools in cancer research.
Huang et al directed the differentiation of human embryonic stem
cells towards pancreatic progenitor cells that formed ductal and
acinar structures. Expression of mutant KRAS or TP53 in progenitor
organoids induced mutation-specific phenotypes. For instance,
mutated TP53, but not mutated KRAS, induced cytosolic SOX9 localization,
which was associated with mortality of patients (Huang
et al, 2015). In another recent study, Drost et al used CRISPR-modified
human stem cell organoids to study DNA repair defects in
cancer (Drost et al, 2017). This showed that accumulation of
mutations in organoids deficient in the mismatch repair gene MLH1
accurately models the mutation profiles observed in mismatch
repair-deficient CRC. Application of this approach to the cancer
predisposition gene NTHL1 demonstrated that a high contribution of
a mutational footprint (signature 30), observed in a breast cancer
cohort, within a tumour can be indicative of germline mutations in
NTHL1 (Drost et al, 2017). These studies demonstrate the immense
opportunities organoid technology gives to study the effects of specific
genetic alterations during cancer initiation and progression.
Integrating the tumour environment in PDTX and PDTO
The location in which a tumour resides, the tumour niche or
microenvironment, plays an important role in cancer development.
Stromal cells not only modulate the behaviour of tumour cells
directly but are also able to influence the immune system (Tauriello
et al, 2018). This is effectively shown in a study by Batlle and
colleagues, using a mouse model in which the main four CRC driver
mutations can be specifically modified in intestinal stem cells.
Quadruple-mutant mice developed metastatic tumours in the small
and large intestine that showed hallmarks of human CRC, including
T-cell exclusion and TGFb-activated stroma. They showed that inhibition
of TGFb induced a cytotoxic T-cell response against tumour
cells that prevented metastasis, highlighting the importance of the
tumour microenvironment (Tauriello et al, 2018).
Immune cells recognize antigens present on cell membranes and
distinguish between cancer cells and non-cancer cells (Schumacher
& Schreiber, 2015). As a consequence of tumour-specific mutations,
cancer cells start expressing neoantigens on their membranes,
which can be recognized by T lymphocytes. The recognition of such
neoantigens is an important factor in the efficacy of clinical
immunotherapies. Additionally, the neoantigen load may form a
biomarker for cancer cells (Schumacher & Schreiber, 2015).
However, the lack of an immune competent environment in both
immune-deficient mice and organoid cultures limits the utility of
these models to explore the interaction between a tumour cell and
the immune system. To overcome this limitation in PDTX models,
humanized mouse models have been developed (Box 1). For this,
selected immune components were introduced to establish a
competent human immune system (HIS) in mice. Humanized mice
maintain various lineages of human blood cells throughout the lifetime
of the recipient animal. Ideally, the hematopoietic stem cells
(HSCs) come from the same patient from whom the PDTX will be
established, in order to avoid immune reactions caused by human
leucocyte antigen mismatch. This is challenging, because bone
marrow biopsies are a burden for weakened patients. Additionally,
growth factor-stimulated bone marrow mobilization for collecting
HSCs from peripheral blood might support tumour progression
(Voloshin et al, 2011). The low yields of CD34-positive HSCs
obtainable from cancer patients strongly limit the number of
humanized mice. Nonetheless, humanized mice allow studying
features of the human anti-tumour immune response in a mouse
model system (Shultz et al, 2012; Byrne et al, 2017). In such a
study, newborn NSG mice were co-engrafted with human HSCs and
human breast cancer cells. In these mice, tumour growth was
accompanied by specific T-cell maturation as well as tumour cellspecific
activation of T cells. Additionally, an accumulation of NK
cells was observed at the tumour site (Wege et al, 2011). Transplantation
of primary lung tumours into humanized mice revealed
the existence of tumour-infiltrating effector memory T cells that
were activated upon human IL-12 administration (Simpson-Abelson
et al, 2008). The ability to study tumour progression combined with
its engrafted immune system provides new approaches for cancer
immunotherapy, resistance of tumour cells to anti-cancer therapies
and the involvement of the immune system in response to
chemotherapy.
In tumour organoid cultures, the lack of an immune competent
environment can be overcome by co-culture with immune cells.
Nozaki and colleagues developed a novel co-culture system of
mouse intra-epithelial lymphocytes and intestinal epithelial cells. In
this co-culture, the intra-epithelial lymphocytes were expanded with
intestinal organoids in the presence of IL-2, IL-7 and IL-15 (Nozaki
et al, 2016). Recently, Zumwalde et al (2016) succeeded in characterizing
the intra-epithelial lymphocyte compartment of healthy
human breast tissue as well as identifying a subset of T lymphocytes
that can be pharmacologically targeted to enhance their response to
breast cancer cells. Specifically, Vd2+ cd T cells were constantly
present in the preparation of mammary ductal epithelial organoids.
In response to zoledronic acid, an aminobisphosphonate drug, these
T lymphocytes started to proliferate. Additionally, Vd2+ T cells from
breast ductal organoids produced IFNc, an anti-tumour cytokine,
and efficiently killed bisphosphonate-pulsed breast cancer cells.
Together, these results demonstrate the potential for Vd2+ cd T
lymphocytes to respond to FDA-approved bisphosphonate drugs as
a novel immunotherapeutic approach to inhibit cancer growth
(Zumwalde et al, 2016). In another recent study, Dijkstra and
colleagues established and validated a platform to induce and analyse
tumour-specific T-cell responses to epithelial cancers, including
mismatch repair-deficient CRC and NSCLC, in a personalized
manner. Enrichment of tumour-reactive T cells from peripheral
blood of patients was successfully established by co-cultures of
peripheral blood lymphocytes with autologous tumour organoids.
Moreover, they demonstrated that these tumour-reactive T cells efficiently
recognize and kill autologous tumour organoids, while leaving
the healthy organoids or tissue unharmed (Dijkstra et al, 2018).
In addition, Neal et al (2018) developed an air–liquid interface
PDTO culture system that recapitulates complex tumour architecture
including stromal and immune compartments. They demonstrated
that the T-cell receptors are highly conserved between the PDTO
culture and the parental tumour. Crucially, they showed that the
PDTO cultures functionally recapitulate the PD-1/PD-L1-dependent
immune checkpoint (Neal et al, 2018).
In addition to the immune system, cancer-associated fibroblasts
(CAFs) play an important role in the tumour environment. As such,
O¨
hlund and colleagues showed that a co-culture of murine pancreatic
stellate cells (PSCs) and PDAC tumour organoids recapitulate
properties of PDAC desmoplasia. They demonstrate that PSCs differentiate
into two distinct subtypes of CAFs with elevated expression
of aSMA and secretion of IL-6 and additional inflammatory
mediators, respectively (O¨ hlund et al, 2017). In accordance with
this, Seino and colleagues established a co-culture of PDAC organoids
and CAFs and showed that the CAFs provide a WNT niche for
PDAC (Seino et al, 2018), highlighting the importance of CAFs in
the tumour microenvironment. In an effort to model diabetic vasculopathy
in vitro, a recent study reported the development of human
blood vessel organoids from pluripotent stem cells that selfassemble
into capillary networks, containing endothelial cells and
pericytes, surrounded by a basement membrane. Upon transplantation
of these organoids into mice, a perfused vascular tree is formed,
including arteries, arterioles and venules (Wimmer et al, 2019).
These human blood vessel organoids may open new doors for PDTO
co-cultures. Culturing PDTOs in the presence of the vascular system,
in addition to co-cultures with CAFs and immune cells, can recapitulate
more components of the tumour microenvironment in vitro.
In conclusion, the lack of an immune competent environment in
both PDTX and PDTO model systems can be overcome by using
humanized mouse models or generating co-cultures with immune
cells, respectively. Additionally, to mimic the tumour stroma in the
organoid model system, PDTOs can be co-cultured with CAFs.
Box 1: Humanized mouse models
Humanized mice are immunodeficient mice engrafted with human
hematopoietic stem cells which give rise to a variety of human blood
cell lineages throughout the life of the animal. The human immune
system (HIS) mouse model can be generated by transplantation of
CD34-positive human hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) or precursor
cells. These cells can be isolated from bone marrow, peripheral blood
or umbilical cord blood. CD34-positive HSC transplantation can be
performed alone or in combination with transplantation of human
immune tissues, such as thymic tissue (Drake et al, 2012). Humanized
mouse models are powerful tools for studying cancer, haematopoiesis,
and inflammatory and infectious disease.
Drug screens and personalized medicine using PDTX and
PDTO models
The discovery of molecular biomarkers for drug sensitivity is of high
importance for the treatment of cancer patients. As illustrated by the
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor gefitinib in NSCLC, some drugs can
give exceptional responses in small subsets of patients. However,
when these patients are not properly identified within larger cohorts,
it results in an overall negative clinical trial outcome (Thatcher et al,
2005). PDTX models can be used as screening platforms for predicting
clinical outcome of the response rate to drugs, identifying
biomarkers for drug sensitivity and studying drug resistance. For
example, a prospective study in PDAC showed that the combination
of the anti-microtubule agent nab-paclitaxel and the anti-metabolite
gemcitabine is effective in PDTX models of PDAC, which correlated
with the clinical efficacy of this combination. Moreover, this combination
of chemotherapeutics has been demonstrated to provide a
survival benefit for advanced PDAC patients in a randomized phase
III study (Von Hoff et al, 2013; Hidalgo et al, 2015). Additionally,
PDTX models are not only able to provide potential clinical indications,
but they may also facilitate the identification of potential drug
efficacy biomarkers. In CRC for example, several studies have shown
that KRAS mutant PDTX models do not respond to cetuximab. The
wild-type status of KRAS is now a well-documented clinical
biomarker for this targeted therapy (Hidalgo et al, 2015). Furthermore,
melanoma PDTX models were involved in the identification of
a mechanism of resistance to targeted drugs, such as the BRAFV600E
inhibitor vemurafenib. Additionally, a novel drug administration
strategy that is clinically applicable was proposed to overcome resistance
(Das Thakur et al, 2013). Although PDTX models are useful
for low-throughput drug screens and predicting clinical outcome,
they do not allow for high-throughput drug screens.
In contrast to PDTX models, PDTOs can be established and
expanded more efficiently, which allows them to be used in
medium- to high-throughput drug screens. The use of PDTOs as a
preclinical model for finding biomarkers and performing genotype–
drug associations is just starting to be explored. A few studies
already show promising results. For example, drug testing on a
panel of organoids derived from 20 chemo-naive CRC patients confirmed
known drug sensitivity–genotype correlations. This proof of
principle highlighted the potential of screening organoid biobanks to
detect novel genotype–phenotype correlations (van de Wetering
et al, 2015). In a recent study, Pauli and colleagues collected 145
specimens, representing 18 different tumour types derived from
patients with metastatic solid tumours. PDTO cultures were established
from 56 of these specimens (38.6%), which were obtained
from biopsies or surgical resection and stored in a living biobank
(Pauli et al, 2017). PDTOs of four patients were used to perform
drug screens, targeting mutated pathways that were identified using
whole exome sequencing (WES). PDTX models were subsequently
used for the validation of the compounds that affected PDTO
growth. They found that two patients, suffering from uterine carcinosarcoma
and endometrial adenocarcinoma, respectively, carried
similar driver mutations in PIK3CA and PTEN. Yet, the drug
response profiles clearly distinguished the two patients. For the uterine
carcinosarcoma case, they identified the combination of the
PIK3 inhibitor buparlisib (Armstrong et al, 2017) with the hypoxia
signalling suppressor vorinostat (Zhang et al, 2017) as one of the
top drug combinations. By contrast, for the endometrial adenocarcinoma
case, a combination of buparlisib with the PARP and HDAC
inhibitor olaparib (Yuan et al, 2017) was found as optimal treatment
in both PDTO and PDTX models. The latter is of high relevance, as
no targeted therapies are approved for endometrial cancer yet (Pauli
et al, 2017). The combination of WES, PDTO and PDTX models
makes it possible to compare the efficacy of specific drugs on individual
tumours thereby providing recommendations for patient care
in a personalized manner. Moreover, it enables assessing how individual
tumours evolve in response to therapies as well as determining
next therapeutic steps for cases where standard clinical options
have already been exhausted. Additionally, the combination of these
techniques allows creating a database that relates drug sensitivity to
tumour genetics. This enables to nominate potential therapeutic
strategies even when only genomic data are available (Pauli et al,
2017). In conclusion, combining different techniques and model
systems for cancer research can improve the prediction of clinical
response to anti-cancer treatments in a personalized manner.
Outlook and challenges
The main challenge in preclinical cancer research remains the establishment
of models that recapitulate the patient situation as close as
possible, retaining intra-tumour heterogeneity and the tumour environment.
So far, not all cancer types can be grown in mice or as
tumour organoids. For the establishment of more PDTO models, it
is of high relevance to find the optimal in vitro growth conditions
that enable tumour cells to grow, while keeping as much cellular
heterogeneity as possible. Selection pressure occurs in both PDTX
and PDTO model systems (Morgan et al, 2017; Pauli et al, 2017).
Therefore, combining the strengths of both preclinical model
systems will be powerful for investigating therapeutic responses.
For example, PDTOs can be used for high-throughput drug screenings
and selecting effective drugs or drug combinations. Subsequently,
the efficacy of these selected drugs should be validated in
PDTX models (Pauli et al, 2017). Together, these preclinical models
can reflect the response to anti-cancer therapies and give indications
for patient-tailored treatment.
Conclusions
In this review, we discussed the role of PDTX and PDTO model
systems in cancer research and therapy development (Table 1).
While PDTXs have already been established for a broad variety of
cancers (Fig 3), the fast-evolving improvements in PDTO culture
systems hold great promise. Transplanting primary tumour tissue
directly into mice allows for the partial resemblance of the tumour
mirco-environment, including stromal components, such as CAFs
and vasculature. Although PDTO cultures do—so far—not maintain
the stromal components of human tumours, they represent genetic
and phenotypic heterogeneity found in human cancers. Additionally,
organoid cultures can be expanded relatively fast, cryopreserved
and genetically modified. These features allow for generating
living tumour organoid biobanks and providing a platform for highthroughput
drug screens. Although both models lack an immune
competent environment, this limitation can be overcome by transplantation
of HSCs and co-culture with T lymphocytes for PDTX and
PDTO models, respectively.
In addition to PDTX and PDTO, several other preclinical models
have been developed over the years. Induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPSCs) can be differentiated towards several lineages and can be
used to model normal development in vitro. iPSCs were successfully
used for exocrine differentiation of pancreatic progenitors and for
modelling PDAC tumour organoids (Huang et al, 2015) as well as
for differentiation to colonic organoids for the modelling of CRC
(Crespo et al, 2018). However, two main challenges in the establishment
of iPSC-derived cancer models are the efficiency of malignant
cell reprogramming and the capability to differentiate the iPSCs into
the cell lineage of interest (Papapetrou, 2016). Additionally, during
the establishment of iPSC-derived cancer models, selective
outgrowth of tumour sub-clones may occur when a subset of cells
harbours specific mutations resulting in a loss of heterogeneity. This
is in stark contrast to PDTO model systems that largely recapitulate
the genetic heterogeneity of the parental tumour (Huang et al, 2015;
van de Wetering et al, 2015; Nanki et al, 2018; Sachs et al, 2018;
Yan et al, 2018). Another recent study described a technology
termed conditional reprogramming, which allows efficient establishment
of patient tissue-derived 2D cancer cell cultures in the presence
of RHO kinase inhibitor and a fibroblast feeder layer (Liu et al,
2012). It is of high importance to combine multiple cancer models
to get the best possible prediction of tumour sensitivity to and toxicity
of anti-cancer treatments, which will ultimately result in more
efficient translation from bench to bedside.
Table 1. Characteristics of patient-derived tumour xenograft (PDTX)
and tumour organoid (PDTO) model systems. Features are rated as
best (++), suitable (+), possible (-/+) and unsuitable (-) (adapted from
Sachs & Clevers, 2014).
Acknowledgements
This review was prepared with support from the Dutch Cancer Society (KWF)/
Alpe d’HuZes Bas Mulder Award to J.D. (KWF/Alpe d’HuZes, grant #10218), and
Oncode Institute to H.C. and J.D.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
